[Senate Hearing 114-21]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]


                                                      S. Hrg. 114-21

                   OVERSIGHT HEARING: THE PRESIDENT'S
                  FISCAL YEAR 2016 BUDGET REQUEST FOR
                THE U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

=======================================================================

                                HEARING

                               BEFORE THE

                              COMMITTEE ON
                      ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
                          UNITED STATES SENATE

                    ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

                             FIRST SESSION

                               __________

                              MARCH 4, 2015

                               __________

  Printed for the use of the Committee on Environment and Public Works


[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]



       Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gpo.gov

                               __________



                   U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
94-980 PDF             WASHINGTON : 2015

________________________________________________________________________________________

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,

http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer
Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-
free).
E-mail, gpo@custhelp.com.






               COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS

                    ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS
                             FIRST SESSION

                  JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma, Chairman
DAVID VITTER, Louisiana              BARBARA BOXER, California
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming               THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho                    BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas               SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
JEFF SESSIONS, Alabama               JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi            KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND, New York
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska                CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota            EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska

                 Ryan Jackson, Majority Staff Director
               Bettina Poirier, Democratic Staff Director

                            C O N T E N T S

                              ----------
                                                                   Page

                             MARCH 4, 2015
                           OPENING STATEMENTS

Inhofe, Hon. James M., U.S. Senator from the State of Oklahoma...     1
Boxer, Hon. Barbara, U.S. Senator from the State of California...     3

                               WITNESSES

McCarthy, Gina, Administrator, United States Environmental
  Protection Agency, Accompanied By: David Bloom, Acting Chief
  Financial Officer, Environmental Protection Agency.............     6
    Prepared statement...........................................     8
    Response to an additional question from Senator Booker.......    14
Responses to additional questions from:
    Senator Fisher...............................................    14
    Senator Inhofe...............................................    17
    Senator Wicker...............................................    46

                          ADDITIONAL MATERIAL

Articles:
    New York Times: Scientists Warn of Rising Oceans From Polar
      Melt.......................................................   147
    UCIrvine News: West Antarctica Melt Rate Has Tripled;
      UCIrvine-NASA..............................................   151
    AGU Publications, Geophysical Research Letters; Mass loss of
      the Amundsen Sea Embayment of west Antarctica from four
      independent techniques.....................................   154
Report, Sciencexpress: Ice Shelf Melting Around Antarctica.......   163


OVERSIGHT HEARING: THE PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2016 BUDGET REQUEST FOR
                THE U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

                              ----------


                        WEDNESDAY, MARCH 4, 2015

                                       U.S. Senate,
                 Committee on Environment and Public Works,
                                                    Washington, DC.
    The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:32 a.m. in room
406, Dirksen Senate Building, Hon. James Inhofe (chairman of
the committee) presiding.
    Present: Senators Inhofe, Vitter, Capito, Boozman,
Sessions, Wicker, Rounds, Sullivan, Boxer, Cardin, Whitehouse,
and Markey.

            OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES INHOFE,
            U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA

    Senator Inhofe. The meeting will come to order.
    We appreciate very much, Administrator McCarthy, your being
here. We will have a lot of things to talk about, agreements
and disagreements.
    The EPA is proposing to cut $333 million from the Clean
Water State Revolving Loan Fund which provides grants and loans
for wastewater treatment. This is one of the programs that back
in my State, and I am sure in other States, that is very
popular and one in which we are very much involved.
    EPA is 3 years behind in reporting to Congress on
wastewater and storm water needs. However, it doesn't stop EPA
from pursing its new waters of the US rule on which we had a
hearing. I have to say, in my State of Oklahoma, the Farm
Bureau and the other ag groups find that to be the one that is
the most offensive to them and is going to be the biggest
problem.
    The President's budget proposes a 66 percent cut in the
Diesel Emissions Reduction Grant Program, which Senator Carper,
who will be here shortly, I am sure, and I work to fund each
year. Voluntary diesel engine retrofits through matching funds
are a cost effective way of reducing diesel engine pollution
which EPA estimates causes 15,000 premature deaths each year.
    EPA consistently misses its statutory deadline for
proposing and finalizing renewable volume obligations for
refiners, creating significant uncertainty and volatility
buying and selling Renewable Identification Numbers or RINs,
which are the credits used as proof of compliance with the
Renewable Fuels Standard.
    The President's budget cuts Superfund, Homeland Security
Preparedness and Response while he is out saying that terrorism
is less of a threat to the American people than climate change.
In fact, EPA also intends to pursue a legislative proposal for
an additional $4 billion in mandatory spending for EPA to
enforce its climate change regulations which 32 States oppose
and will result in double digit electricity price increases in
43 States.
    Mandatory spending would mean that EPA would hand out money
with no congressional oversight. The President requests $3.5
million for 20 new attorneys because, ``Each EPA action is
expected to be challenged in court, which will require skilled
and experienced attorneys specialized in the Clean Air Act to
devote significant resources to defense of these actions.''
    I think that was your quote, Madam Administrator. These
attorneys would defend a climate change rule which, according
to EPA's own consistent testimony, will not affect climate
change.
    In fact, the Clean Power Plan would reduce CO2
concentrations by less than 1 percent, reduce global
temperature rise by less than 0.016 degrees Fahrenheit, and
reduce sea level rise by the thickness of three sheets of
paper.
    If we would like to point to our international agreement
with China as proof that global concentrations will change, it
is important to keep in mind that China emits 800 million tons
of CO2 per month while the Clean Power Plan
reduction would be 550 million tons per year. We are talking
about 550 million tons per year as opposed to 800 million tons
a month from China.
    In November, EPA proposed lowering the ozone standard when
the current standard is not implemented in 40 percent of the
Country. Manufacturers will not be able to expand.
    I remember years ago, we did a study in Oklahoma on what it
would really mean if we had to go into a non-attainment status.
It would be something very, very damaging. When we had the
standards of 75 ppm, I will ask you to respond, how many States
have not complied with the 2008 standards before we even go
into more stringent standards.
    Members of the committee and I are looking forward to
questioning the EPA's priorities on the regulatory agenda.
    Senator Boxer.
    [The prepared statement of Senator Inhofe follows:]

             Statement of Hon. James Inhofe, U.S. Senator
                       from the State of Oklahoma

    ``Administrator McCarthy, thank you for appearing this
morning.
    The President's $8.6 billion proposal to fund the EPA
represents a $452 million increase from last year's enacted
levels but sacrifices core responsibilities in the pursuit of
new regulations.
    EPA proposes cutting $333 million from the Clean Water
State Revolving Loan Fund which provides grants and loans for
wastewater treatment and pollution control. EPA is 3 years
behind in reporting to Congress on wastewater and storm water
needs. However, it doesn't stop EPA for pursing its new waters
of the US rule which EPA cannot ensure us doesn't expand its
authority over isolated ponds, storm sewer systems, water reuse
systems, roadside ditches, rock quarries, farm activities, and
even backyard creeks.
    The President's budget proposes a 66 percent cut to the
Diesel Emissions Reduction Grant Program which Senator Carper
and I work to fund each year. Voluntary diesel engine retrofits
through matching funds are a cost effective way of reducing
diesel engine pollution which EPA estimates causes 15,000
premature deaths each year.
    EPA consistently misses its statutory deadline for
proposing and finalizing renewable volume obligations (RVO) for
refiners creating significant uncertainty and volatility buying
and selling Renewable Identification Numbers (RINs), which are
the credits used as proof of compliance with the Renewable
Fuels Standard (RFS).
    The President's budget cuts Superfund Homeland Security
Preparedness and Response while he is out saying that terrorism
is less of a threat to the American people than climate change.
In fact, EPA also intends to pursue a legislative proposal for
an additional $4 billion in mandatory spending for EPA to
enforce its climate change regulations which 32 states oppose
and will result in double digit electricity price increases in
43 states. Mandatory spending would mean that EPA would hand
out money with no congressional oversight. The President
requests $3.5 million for 20 new attorneys because, ``each EPA
action is expected to be challenged in court, which will
require skilled and experienced attorneys specialized in the
Clean Air Act to devote significant resources to defense of
these actions.'' These attorneys would defend a climate change
rule which, according to EPA's own consistent testimony, will
not affect climate change.
    In fact, the Clean Power Plan would reduce CO2
concentrations by less than a percent, reduce global
temperature rise by less than 0.016 degrees Fahrenheit, and
reduce sea level rise by the thickness of three sheets of
paper. If we would like to point to our international agreement
with China as proof that global concentrations will change,
it's important to keep in mind that China emits 800 million
tons of CO2 per month while the Clean Power Plan
reduce 550 million tons per year.
    In November, EPA proposed lowering the ozone standard when
the current standard is not implemented in 40 percent of the
country. Manufacturers won't be able to expand and with a non-
attainment designation, federally supported highway and transit
projects, both new capacity and in-progress projects, will be
halted. This only increases cost of existing expansions,
complicates the ability to quickly respond to congestion, and
reduce states' competitiveness for additional expansion
opportunities.
    The members of this Committee and I are looking forward to
questioning EPA's priorities and regulatory agenda.''

           OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BARBARA BOXER,
           U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

    Senator Boxer. Thank you very much, Senator.
    Welcome, Administrator McCarthy. Thank you for your
dedication and devotion to your work, to the American people,
to clean air, clean water, safe drinking water, and making sure
that we treat this planet the way it deserves to be treated so
that our grandchildren can actually have a decent quality of
life.
    EPA has a vital mission that affects the well-being of
every American: implementing our Nation's landmark laws. I
mentioned a few, clean air, children's health, safe drinking
water, toxics, and water quality in America's lakes and rivers.
The health and safety of our children and families depends on
the critical work you do and the way we support you or fail to
support you.
    I am pleased that EPA's budget request of $8.6 billion
includes a $452 million increase above the Fiscal Year 2015
enacted level, but we need to remember that 6 years ago, EPA's
budget was $10.3 billion, and the Fiscal Year 2016 budget
request that we will discuss today is a 20 percent cut from
that level. EPA is being asked to do more rather than less. I
think it is important for us to keep that in mind.
    Yes, I think my colleague is right. The budget does place
an important focus on combating dangerous climate change. We
are seeing the consequences of climate change all around us,
from historic droughts to extreme wildfires to vanishing
wildlife habitat. We are seeing the extreme weather predicted
by scientists who sat there in 2008 and said, you are going to
see more snowfall, more droughts and more heat.
    When my friend and colleague went to the floor to show that
it was cold out and threw a snowball, he said he did it because
he thinks we are too serious and he wants us to lighten up.
    Senator Inhofe. Since you mentioned my name, I can
interrupt you here. Yes, we need to lighten up.
    Senator Boxer. Let the record show I quoted him correctly.
He said ``We need to lighten up.''
    Here is the deal. He proved my point and the point of those
of us who believe climate change is real because we are seeing
these extreme snowfalls, records are being broken while we are
seeing extreme heat. That is the weather. The climate is
different than the weather. We are clearly seeing the rise in
overall temperatures.
    This is happening right before us. Last week on the front
page of the Post, we read that Native villages in Alaska are
being threatened by deteriorating sea ice. Entire villages will
have to be moved. One is being moved right now at a cost of
upwards of $100 million. The article warns, ``In the coming
decades this could apply to numerous other towns.'' This has
happened before.
    Honest to God, I think the only place that doesn't get it
is right here but that is the way it is and the way it will
continue to be for a couple years, that is for sure.
    I want to say EPA is doing essential work on behalf of the
American people to address the growing threat of climate
change. The budget would ensure that State governments have the
resources, the technical assistance and the incentives to help
cut carbon pollution from our Country's biggest source, power
plants.
    I urge you to keep up your good work. You are going to be
attacked hard today on this. I know that and I appreciate the
fact that my colleagues on the Republican side see it
differently. I want to say that those of us on this committee
on our side of the aisle feel you have to do this. It is in the
law.
    Carbon pollution is pollution. We already know from
scientists that the co-benefits of reducing carbon mean better
health for all of our people, regardless of where they live.
    Another important area of EPA's budget is support for the
Nation's water infrastructure. I commend EPA for proposing
funding for the Water Infrastructure Financing and Innovation
Act, which was created last year in the Water Resources Reform
and Development Act of 2014.
    I want to thank Senator Vitter, Senator Inhofe, Senator
Cardin and Senator Carper for going along with this idea.
    This is new financing. It is like TIFIA, it leverages
funds. However, I agree with my friend and colleague that this
is not a replacement for the State revolving fund. I am very
concerned that inadequate levels of funding proposed for the
State revolving fund is going to hurt our people at home.
    Our Nation's water infrastructure needs far outstrip the
funding available. The proposed $53.8 million cut to the State
revolving funds will make this funding gap grow. We are in
agreement on that, Mr. Chairman.
    EPA is also doing essential work to protect the drinking
water of 117 million Americans. I believe this clean water
rulemakes a lot of sense. I want to compliment you and the
Corps of Engineers for your testimony at the last hearing. It
was very contentious.
    The bottom line is we need to make sure that if there is
pollution upstream, that it does not wind up in the bodies of
the people living downstream. We need to protect the Clean,
Safe Drinking Water Act. One way to do it is by having this
rule clarified.
    In closing, EPA has a record that Americans support. You
are one of the most popular agencies in the Country, whether it
is Republicans, Democrats or Independents, because you are
fighting for the health of the people.
    I think you are doing a great job. I look forward to
hearing from you later.
    [The prepared statement of Senator Boxer follows:]

             Statement of Hon. Barbara Boxer, U.S. Senator
                      from the State of California

    Welcome Administrator Gina McCarthy. EPA has a vital
mission that affects the wellbeing of every American--
implementing our nation's landmark laws to address clean air,
children's health, safe drinking water, toxics, and water
quality in America's lakes and rivers. The health and safety of
our children and families depends on the critical work you do.
    I am pleased that EPA's budget request of $8.6 billion
includes a $452 million increase above the fiscal year enacted
level. But we need to remember that 6 years ago, EPA's budget
was $10.3 billion, and the fiscal year budget request that we
will discuss today is a 20 percent cut from that level. EPA is
being asked to do more rather than less and it is important to
keep that in mind.
    This budget places an important focus on combating
dangerous climate change. We are already seeing the
consequences of climate change all around us--from historic
droughts to extreme wildfires to vanishing wildlife habitat.
And we are seeing extreme weather also predicted by
scientists--record snowfalls and record heat. So I thank my
Chairman for proving that point on the Senate floor recently.
That was not his intent, but for me he helped my case.
    Last week, on the front page of the Washington Post we read
that native villages in Alaska are being threatened by
deteriorating sea ice. Entire villages will have to be moved,
which will cost upwards of a hundred million dollars. And the
article warns that ``in the coming decades [this] could apply
to numerous other towns.''
    Another important area of EPA's budget is support for the
nation's water infrastructure. I want to commend EPA for
proposing funding for the Water Infrastructure Financing and
Innovation Act (WIFIA), which was created last year in the
Water Resources Reform and Development Act of 2014. This new
financing tool will help leverage private financing for
critical drinking water and wastewater infrastructure projects
and can be an important complement to the Clean Water and
Drinking Water State Revolving Funds.
    However, WIFIA is not a replacement for the State Revolving
Funds. I am concerned about the inadequate levels of funding
proposed for these programs. Our nation's water infrastructure
needs far outstrip the funding available, and the proposed
$53.8 million cut to the State Revolving Funds will make this
funding gap grow.
    EPA is also doing essential work to protect the drinking
water of 117 million Americans. The agency's proposed Clean
Water rule will protect those water bodies that provide
drinking water for 1 in 3 Americans while being clear about
which waters are exempt. You have undertaken an open and
transparent process that has given all sides the opportunity to
comment. It is important to incorporate that feedback and
finalize this vital rule.
    EPA has a record that Americans support--clean air, clean
water, and a healthy planet are shared values. I look forward
to hearing from Administrator McCarthy today.

    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Boxer.
    Ms. McCarthy, we will recognize you for the reasonable time
you may take. Then we will open it up to questions.

   STATEMENT OF GINA MCCARTHY, ADMINISTRATOR, UNITED STATES
 ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY, ACCOMPANIED BY: DAVID BLOOM,
ACTING CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER, ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

    Ms. McCarthy. Thank you, Chairman Inhofe, Ranking Member
Boxer and members of the committee, for the opportunity to
appear before you to discuss the Environmental Protection
Agency's proposed Fiscal Year 2016 budget.
    I am joined by the agency's Acting Chief Financial Officer,
David Bloom.
    The EPA's budget request of $8.592 billion in discretionary
funding for the 2016 Fiscal Year provides resources that are
vital to protecting human health and the environment, while
building a solid path forward for sustainable economic growth.
    Since 1970 when EPA was founded, we have seen over and over
again that a safe environment and a strong economy go hand in
hand.
    The budget supports essential work to address climate
change, improve air quality, protect our water, safeguard the
public from toxic chemicals, support communities' environmental
health, maintain Corps enforcement strengths, support needed
research and work toward a sustainable future for all
Americans.
    Effective environmental protection is a joint effort of the
EPA, States and our tribal partners. We are setting a high bar
for continuing our partnership efforts and looking for
opportunities for closer collaboration and targeted joint
government projects, in planning processes through efforts like
E-Enterprise.
    That is why the largest part of our budget, $3.6 billion or
42 percent, is provided directly to our State and tribal
partners. The Fiscal Year 2016 budget request includes an
increase of $108 million for State and tribal categorical
grants.
    This budget requests $1.1 billion to address climate change
and to improve air quality. These resources will help protect
the most vulnerable to climate impacts and harmful health
effects of air pollution through common sense standards,
guidelines, as well as partnership programs.
    Climate change is not just an environmental challenge. It
is a threat to public health, our domestic and global economy
and to our national and international security. The request
supports the President's Climate Action Plan and in particular,
the Clean Power Plan, which establishes carbon pollution
standards for power plants.
    In addition, the President's budget calls for $4 billion
for a Clean Power State Incentive Fund to support State efforts
to accelerate carbon pollution reductions in the power sector.
    Protecting the Nation's water remains a top priority for
EPA. In Fiscal Year 2016, we will finalize and support
implementation of the Clean Water rule which will clarify types
of waters covered under the Clean Water Act and foster more
certain and efficient business decisions to protect the
Nation's waters.
    Recognizing the need for water infrastructure, the SRF and
related efforts are funded at over $2.3 billion. We will work
with our partners to help communities by focusing on issues
such as financial planning for future public infrastructure
investments and expanded efforts through States to identify
financing opportunities for resilient drinking water,
wastewater and stormwater infrastructure.
    Last month, the agency launched the Water Infrastructure
and Resilience Financing Center. That is a key component of
this expanded effort. We are proposing a multifaceted effort to
help our communities, including low income neighborhoods, rural
communities and communities of color.
    This includes targeted funding and on the ground community
assistance through EPA's regional coordinators and a network of
circuit riders. An investment of $16.2 million will help local
communities improve safety and security at chemical facilities
and prevent and prepare for oil spills.
    These efforts represent a shared commitment among those
with a stake in chemical facility safety and security, ranging
from facility owners to first responders.
    The Fiscal Year 2016 budget request will let us continue to
make a real and visible difference to communities every day. It
gives us a foundation to improve infrastructure across the
Country and it will sustain State, tribal and Federal
environmental efforts across all our programs.
    With this proposed budget, the President is not only
sending a clear signal about the resources EPA needs to
effectively and efficiently work with States and tribes to
protect public health and the environment, it is also a part of
an overall Federal a budget proposal that does not accept the
bad public policy embodied in sequestration and does not hold
back needed resources and nondefense spending in order to
increase needed defense spending or vice versa.
    Instead, the President's proposed Fiscal Year 2016 budget
finds a path forward to avoid sequestration and properly
support both domestic and national security interests.
    Mr. Chairman, I thank you for the opportunity to testify
and look forward to answering questions.
    [The prepared statement of Ms. McCarthy follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

          Response by Gina McCarthy to an Additional Question
                          from Senator Booker


                               beach act


    Question 1. The BEACH Act authorized the EPA to award
grants to eligible states, territories, and tribes to develop
and implement beach water quality monitoring and notification
programs for coastal recreational waters. As a result, EPA's
Beach Grants have made nearly $10 million a year available for
the past 4 years. The program allows for a more standardized
approach to the monitoring of water quality and the
notification of beach goers if the water they are swimming in
is unsafe for recreation.

     What is EPA's justification for zeroing out funding for
the BEACH Act grant program?
     Given the reduction in EPA's proposed fiscal year from
$10 million to $0, how does EPA plan to assist State and local
public health officials in identifying, notifying the public
of, and ultimately reducing the risk of illness and disease to
swimmers at our recreational beaches?

    Response. The agency is proposing to eliminate certain
mature program activities that are well-established, well
understood, and where there is the possibility of maintaining
some of the human health benefits through implementation at the
local level. While beach monitoring continues to be important
to protect human health, states and local governments now have
the technical expertise and procedures to continue beach
monitoring without Federal support, as a result of the
significant technical guidance and financial support the Beach
Program has provided.

          Responses by Gina McCarthy to Additional Questions
                          from Senator Fischer

    Question 1. In your budget justification document you say:

    ``In support of the President's Climate Action Plan, the
EPA will work to assist other Federal agencies to improve the
analysis of climate change issues under NEPA, including
estimating greenhouse gas emissions associated with Federal
actions and consideration of mitigation measures, as well as
fostering climate resiliency.''

    Are you already implementing CEQ's draft guidance that
would require all Federal agencies to address global climate
change in NEPA reviews?
    Response. NEPA currently requires that agencies consider
greenhouse gas emissions and climate change in the NEPA process
as it would other pollutants. The draft CEQ guidance will help
promote consistency and efficiency in meeting NEPA
obligations.\1\ Our ongoing comments to other agencies reflect
the concepts outlined in the draft guidance, and are meant to
help agencies meet their existing NEPA responsibilities. As
noted in the draft guidance, ``Climate change is a fundamental
environmental issue, and the relation of Federal actions to it
falls squarely within NEPA's focus.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2014-12-24/pdf/2014-30035.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Question 2. In your role as a reviewer of Environmental
Impact Statements developed by other agencies, do you believe
you can require other agencies to adopt measures to mitigate
global climate change?
    Response. The EPA does not have authority to require other
agencies to adopt mitigation measures as part of the NEPA
process. However, NEPA does require that agencies consider
appropriate mitigation measures for the environmental impacts
associated with their proposed actions, and the agency will
continue to recommend that agencies consider ways to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions associated with their actions.

    Question 3. Do you think that the draft CEQ guidance would
give you the power to second-guess a decision by another
Federal agency that any effect on global climate change is
insignificant and no EIS is needed?
    Response. The EPA's role is to make recommendations for the
other agencies to consider as they make their decisions on
actions that may impact the environment. NEPA requires agencies
to carry out their NEPA responsibilities in a manner that is
reasonable, and the same rule of reasonableness applies to the
consideration of climate impacts. Embedded in implementing NEPA
are the rule of reason, proportionality, and flexibility to
provide the agency preparing the analysis and documentation to
focus on the issues that are important, hear from all
stakeholders and consider their input based upon the substance
and expertise provided, and exercise their professional
judgment in projecting the potential environmental--including
all elements of the human environment which encompass
ecological, social, and economic effects of the proposal and
any reasonable alternatives. The CEQ's draft guidance seeks to
provide greater clarity to agencies as they carry out their
NEPA responsibilities.

    Question 4. Have you done any outreach to stakeholders on
the draft CEQ guidance?
    Response. CEQ, as the drafter of the guidance, is managing
the public input process. The EPA has not conducted any
independent stakeholder outreach.

    Question 5. How will the new guidance affect how EPA
complies with NEPA for its own actions, such as issuing Clean
Water Act permits or developing regulations?
    Response. The EPA is working to ensure that NEPA compliance
for our own actions consider, as appropriate and consistent
with the draft CEQ guidance, the extent to which the proposed
action has associated greenhouse gas emissions, and the extent
to which adaptation and resilience measures may be necessary in
light of expected climate change. Some of the specific actions
included in this question, such as some Clean Water Act permits
and issuing of regulations, do not fall within the scope of
NEPA because they are specifically exempted by statute, e.g.,
see Section 511 (c) of the Clean Water Act.


                    renewable fuels standards (rfs)


    Question 6. In 2007, Congress put the Renewable Fuel
Standard in place for 15 years, setting a stable policy
environment to drive investment and growth in renewable fuel.
This approach has guided billions of dollars from around the
world and here at home toward innovation inside the United
States. American agriculture has also responded to this
investment signal. For example, just this year, 3 cellulosic
biofuel refineries opened, each co-located with a corn ethanol
facility. Each biorefinery is producing clean, cellulosic
biofuel. Using specially designed equipment, all three
facilities use corn stover, an agricultural waste material
collected from the very same fields that provide corn to
ethanol facilities. This didn't happen by accident. Farmers
make planting decisions based on the RFS. Equipment
manufacturers' invest million in R&D perfecting new equipment
that can be available to serve this market. Congress made a
promise in 2007, and it is the EPA's responsibility to uphold
that promise with a regulatory process that meets our intent.
The 2014 RVO proposal would have stranded billions of dollars
of investment and ripped the rug out from under those in the
private sector who responded to the investment signals of the
RFS. Will your new proposal retain the commitment to American
agriculture that we made nearly a decade ago?
    Response. The EPA understands the importance of the RFS
program, and is committed to the program's goals, namely,
reducing emissions of greenhouse gases from the transportation
sector and increasing American energy security. The agency is
aware that the agricultural community, as well as renewable
fuel producers and other stakeholders, have invested
significant time, energy, and resources into ensuring that the
objectives of the RFS program become a reality. Renewable fuel
use has increased substantially over the past decade, and we
have seen significant advancements in renewable fuel production
capacity and efficiency, including recent advancements in the
commercial-scale production of cellulosic biofuel. Congress
designed the RFS program to rely primarily on growth in
conventional biofuel beginning with its inception in 2006, but
then to transition to growth primarily in cellulosic and other
advanced biofuel growth for 2015 and beyond. Our proposed
standards are consistent with this intent of Congress.
    The annual rule-setting process under the statute has
proven to be very challenging, and we recognize that the delay
in issuing the 2014 standards has exacerbated uncertainty in
the market for both renewable fuel producers and obligated
parties. However, the EPA is committed to getting this program
back on the statutory timeline to provide needed market
certainty and support the development and use of renewable
fuels by completing a rulemaking for the 2014, 2015 and 2016
RFS standards by November 30, 2015.

    Question 7. Your staff has recently stated that you
anticipate putting out RFS volumes by late June. Do you see
that as acceptable? Given that we have biodiesel producers
across the country shutting down or idling their plants, why do
we need to wait another 4 months? If we wait until June we've
lost another half of a year.
    Response. The EPA recognizes that delays in issuing the
rule have contributed to uncertainty in the market. We proposed
volume standards for 2014, 2015, and 2016 on June 10, 2015 (80
FR 33100) and are committed to finalizing these standards by
November 30, 2015. The agency also will finalize the applicable
volume of biomass-based diesel for 2017 along the same
timeline. By doing so we will get the program back on the
statutory timeline and establish a more stable footing for the
program's future.

    Question 8. Your staff also recently stated that 2014
numbers will be based on actual production. What does that mean
exactly? Does that mean the volumes will be set at the levels
that were actually produced under the RFS in 2014? And can we
assume that we will see growth from there in the biodiesel
category in 2015 and 2016?
    Response. The EPA has proposed 2014 standards that reflect
the volumes of renewable fuel that were actually used in 2014,
as it is those volumes that are eligible to be used to meet
applicable standards under the RFS program. The agency did so
because the 2014 compliance year is now over, and any standard
the EPA sets for 2014 can no longer influence renewable fuel
production or use in that year. Details of how we calculated
the 2014 volumes are addressed as part of the proposal (80 FR
33100, June 10, 2015).

    Question 9. You recently approved an application from
Argentinian companies to essentially streamline biodiesel
imports from Argentina under the RFS. Why would you do that
when the overall RFS hasn't been set for 2 years and the U.S.
industry is in disarray? It almost shows a disregard for the
U.S. companies that we know are struggling as a direct result
of the delays on the RFS. Can you explain why you would do that
at this time? Why not wait until the RFS volumes are set and
then make a decision on the Argentina imports?
    Response. The agency notes that under the existing
regulations, biofuels were already being imported from
Argentina. The CARBIO plan provides for even more oversight to
ensure that feedstocks used to produce compliant renewable
fuels under the program are coming from qualifying land.
CARBIO's plan includes a robust tracking program that requires
that an independent third party conduct an annual survey of the
entire biofuel supply chain, from soybean production through
intermediate processing, to biodiesel production. This approved
plan enhances existing regulatory oversight requirements
currently applied to qualifying renewable fuels being imported
from Argentina.

    Question 10. I understand that in setting the annual
biodiesel volumes you are required under the law to look at
production capacity and other factors. So now that we know this
extra production exists and is likely coming to the United
States, how will you account for that as you set annual RFS
standards for biodiesel? In other words, will you increase
volumes more aggressively to allow U.S. producers to continue
to grow, so that they're not displaced by these Argentinian
imports?
    Response. The proposed biomass-based diesel standards
establish minimum volumes for biomass-based diesel to provide
additional certainty to the biodiesel and renewable diesel
industries. The proposed biomass-based diesel standards ensure
steady growth through 2017.
    All of the RFS standards that we proposed take into
consideration domestic production, imports and exports. The
market will determine the precise mix of fuels and their
sources for complying with the standards, as a result of a
number of market forces and national biofuel or related
policies both here in the U.S. and in other countries. Since
those market forces and policies change over time, we did not
attempt to estimate precisely the resulting volumes that would
be imported from specific countries. The proposed standards
provide ample room for the growth of biodiesel volumes from
domestic production in addition to potential import volumes.


                              epa region 7


    Question 11. Private Nebraska building contractor entities
have shared inquiries and questions regarding EPA Region 7,
Kansas City, and the utilization of resources and personnel
enforcing lead paint regulations against Nebraska home and
building contractors. In particular, private building
contractors have expressed concerns involving the manner and
rationale of investigations conducted by Region 7 and the
protocol for fines pursued for stated violations.
    Response. We interpret this to be a statement to provide
context to Question 13.

    Question 12. In order to address concerns expressed by
Nebraska private contractor interests, I request that EPA
provide the following information involving Region 7, Kansas
City and the regulation of lead paint in private homes and
commercial businesses:
    Response. We interpret this to be a statement to provide
context to Question 13.

    Question 13. Please provide a budget breakdown of:

     The amount of Region 7 funds expended for outreach and
education to the building contractor community in Nebraska.
     The amount of funds directly tied to educating property
owners and building contractors on EPA lead paint rules and
regulations.
     What amount of Region 7's Budget is dedicated to
investigations and pursuit of fines?
    Response. Region 7 has responsibilities for various Toxic
Substance Control Act regulations related to lead-based paint
including TSCA Section 402(c), 15 U.S.C. Section 2682,
Renovation, Repair, and Painting Program (RRP) which addresses
lead-based paint hazards created by renovation, repair, and
painting activities that disturb lead-based paint in housing
and child occupied facilities built before 1978. Within Region
7, the states of Iowa and Kansas have requested and been
approved for implementing the RRP Program. Neither Nebraska nor
Missouri have sought such approval and, as such, Region 7 is
responsible for direct implementation of the regulation in
these two states. Additionally, Region 7 is responsible for
direct implementation of the TSCA Section 1018, Lead-based
Paint Disclosure Rule, in Iowa, Nebraska, Kansas and Missouri.
This rule is not delegable to states.
    Region 7 implements all agency enforcement and compliance
programs (which includes supporting many environmental statutes
such as Resource Conservation and Recovery Act; Clean Water
Act; Safe Drinking Water Act; Clean Air Act; Residential Lead-
Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act; etc.) and for the Lead Risk
Reduction program (which includes supporting the RRP and
Disclosure Rule, providing education and outreach, implementing
lead-based paint activities, and other program-related
activities). In fiscal year 4, Region 7 dedicated 4.3 FTE and
$314,000 to support RRP and Disclosure Rule activities (which
includes State grant oversight, State technical support,
outreach/compliance assistance, enforcement, and other related
activities). In fiscal year 5, Region 7 has allocated 4.3 FTE
and approximately $275,000 to support RRP and Disclosure Rule
activities. While Region 7 receives funding for the agency's
programs, Region 7 does not allocate its funding on a state-by-
State basis or at an activity level.

    Question 14. Does Region 7 contract with private or
commercial entities to investigate reported violations? And
Does Region 7 offer financial incentives to individuals who
report violations?
    Response. The EPA, through a cooperative agreement with the
National Older Worker Career Center (NOWCC), utilizes the NOWCC
personnel for various activities (i.e. inspections, outreach,
administrative support, etc.). The NOWCC is a national non-
profit organization which helps to identify and place older
workers with the EPA through the Senior Environmental
Employment Program. Region 7 is a participant and provides
funding to the SEE Program to obtain support for lead-based
paint related inspections and other activities. The personnel
provided by the NOWCC for the program are considered grant
enrollees with the NOWCC. These personnel would conduct both
routine inspections and inspections assigned as a result of a
tip or complaint.
    Region 7 does not offer incentives to individuals who
report violations. Individuals frequently contact Region 7 to
report suspected violations. These individuals are generally
contractors concerned that non-compliance by others may place
them at a competitive disadvantage; families concerned about
the risks of lead dust to children created through painting or
renovation activities in their home; and/or, local agencies who
have identified painting or renovation activities which they
perceive to be non-compliant and which may pose risks to
children.

          Responses by Gina McCarthy to Additional Questions
                          from Senator Inhofe


                                 ozone


    Question 1. In the proposed rule, you State that EPA will
take a series of actions in the next year to implement the new
standard. (EPA says it will issue guidance for State
designations within 4 months of finalizing the rule, provide
guidance for infrastructure SIPs, and propose any needed
implementation rules within 1 year.)

     Approximately how much money, resources, and staff will
be required to complete this work in fiscal year 6?
     Has EPA requested the resources needed to complete all of
this work?
     Where in the budget are these resources requested?

    Response. Within the levels in the fiscal year President's
Budget, the agency requests the resources and FTE necessary to
continue its Clean Air Act-prescribed responsibilities to
administer and implement the NAAQS. This includes funding for
review of the ozone NAAQS and for implementation of a
potentially revised ozone standard, including development of
transition guidance and area designation guidance, within
current statutory and resource limitations. The agency also
will continue consulting with states to determine additional
methods to improve the SIP development and implementation
process that are within current statutory limitations.

    Question 2. The proposal relies heavily on ``unknown
technologies'' for compliance (Table 4-10 in the draft RIA: 66
percent of NOx controls in the East are unknown and 70 percent
in the West are unknown). However, only ``extreme''
nonattainment areas can include unknowns in their SIPs.

     How do you expect states to comply with a standard when
your agency can't even identify ways to make it feasible?
     Do you expect states to have to choose between extreme
sanctions or self-designating themselves as ``extreme''
nonattainment areas, accepting all the extreme stationary
source requirements that go along with that designation?
     Your RIA already assumes in the ``known controls'' that
the existing source proposal will be complied with fully, so
how is it even remotely possible to achieve your proposed
standard?

    Response. The EPA's application of unknown control measures
reflects the agency's experience that some portion of controls
to be applied in the future may not be currently available but
will be deployed or developed over time. The EPA's application
of unknown control measures does not mean the agency has
concluded that all unknown control measures are currently not
commercially available or do not exist. Unknown control
technologies or measures can include existing controls or
measures for which the EPA does not have sufficient data to
accurately estimate engineering costs. In addition, there will
likely be some emissions reductions from currently unknown
control technologies as a result of state-specific rules that
are not yet finalized.

    Question 3: How much of future attainment relies on
``unknown controls''? How does EPA calculate the cost these
future ``unknown controls''? Why has EPA lowered the cost of
those unknown controls by half since developing the 2011 ozone
rule?
    Response. Following advice from the EPA Advisory Council on
Clean Air Compliance Analysis (COUNCIL), in the 2014 analysis
EPA relied on a methodology to estimate the cost of unknown
controls that used an average cost-per-ton for the needed
emissions reductions. The agency agrees with the COUNCIL that
the approach is both transparent and strikes a balance between
the likelihood that some unidentified abatement would be
achieved at costs that are lower than average and that some
would be achieved at costs that are higher than average.

    Question 4. In 2011, President Obama pulled the plug on
this same proposal due to ``regulatory burdens and regulatory
uncertainty.'' Our economy was still struggling to recover from
the recession, and the $90 billion price tag was something even
he was unable to justify.

     o you really think that our economy is in better shape
now to handle a $3 trillion rule than it was in 2011?
     What has changed since the President's decision that
signals now is an appropriate time to radically revise the
standard before the benefits of the last one have been fully
implemented?

    Response. Sections 108 and 109 of the Clean Air Act (CAA)
govern the establishment, review, and revision, as appropriate,
of the NAAQS to protect public health and welfare. The CAA
requires the EPA to periodically review the air quality
criteria the science upon which the standards are based and the
standards themselves. This rulemaking is being conducted
pursuant to these statutory requirements.
    The EPA sets the National Ambient Air Quality Standards at
a level that is requisite to protect the public health and
welfare, based on the best available science. The U.S. Supreme
Court ruled in Whitman v. American Trucking Associations, 531
U.S. 457 (2001), that under Section 109 of the Clean Air Act,
the EPA may not consider the costs of implementation in setting
standards.
    Under the Clean Air Act, states ultimately determine what
local measures may be required to address local sources of air
pollution. For that reason, the EPA presents an illustrative
estimation of the costs and benefits of complying with proposed
revisions to a NAAQS. EPA estimates that reducing pollution to
meet a revised ozone NAAQS in 2025 will yield health benefits
of $6.4 to $13 billion annually for a standard of 70 ppb, and
$19 to $38 billion annually for a standard of 65 ppb, except
for California, which was analyzed separately. Nationwide
costs, except California, are estimated at $3.9 billion in 2025
for a standard of 70 ppb, and $15 billion for a standard of 65
ppb. The estimated benefits of a strengthened ozone standard
outweigh the estimated costs by as much as a ratio of $3.33 to
$1.
    For decades, ozone pollution has been reduced by the
combined efforts of Federal, state, tribal and local
governments. The costs and benefits of Federal rules are
evaluated during the public process for each rule. More than
forty years of experience with the Clean Air Act has shown that
America can build its economy and create jobs while cutting
pollution to protect the health of our citizens and our
workforce.

    Question 5. Compared to just 4 years ago, EPA has lowered
cost estimates for the same stringent ozone standards by as
much as $51 billion. Have compliance costs for ozone controls
really dropped by over 80 percent since 2010?
    Response. The cost estimates for the 2014 proposal are
different than the 2010 reconsideration proposal because we are
analyzing changes between different current and proposed
standards, air quality, and needed emissions reductions. In
part because of recent improvements in air quality and Federal
and State actions that will come into effect over the next
decade, meeting the proposed standards will require fewer
emissions reductions than the reconsideration, meaning the
estimated costs are lower.

    Question 6. Over the last 4 years, EPA has slashed its cost
estimates for the same stringent ozone standards.

     Has the cost of compliance technologies gone down, or did
EPA change the assumptions in its cost-benefit analysis?
     How much of that reduction is due to projected air
quality improvements versus changes in EPA's control cost
assumptions?

    Response. The cost estimates for the 2014 proposal are
different than the 2010 reconsideration proposal because we are
analyzing changes between different current and proposed
standards, air quality, and needed emissions reductions. In
part because of recent improvements in air quality and Federal
and State actions that will come into effect over the next
decade, meeting the proposed standards will require fewer
emissions reductions than the reconsideration, meaning the
estimated costs are lower.

    Question 7. In 2010, EPA projected that the same ozone
standards that EPA is now proposing could cost as much as $44
billion per year. These are straight-up, added costs to
American manufacturing. I'm concerned that, during this slow
economic recovery, we are driving manufacturing out of the
U.S., to other countries with lax environmental standards. In
analyzing these proposed regulations, does EPA consider the
effects of driving manufacturing offshore, to countries with
little or no environmental controls?
    Response. The EPA sets the National Ambient Air Quality
Standards at a level that is requisite to protect the public
health and welfare, based on the best available science. The
U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Whitman v. American Trucking
Associations, 531 U.S. 457 (2001), that under Section 109 of
the Clean Air Act, the EPA may not consider the costs of
implementation in setting standards.
    Under the Clean Air Act, states ultimately determine what
local measures may be required to address local sources of air
pollution. For that reason, the EPA presents an illustrative
estimation of the costs and benefits of complying with proposed
revisions to a NAAQS. EPA estimates that reducing pollution to
meet a revised ozone NAAQS in 2025 will yield health benefits
of $6.4 to $13 billion annually for a standard of 70 ppb, and
$19 to $38 billion annually for a standard of 65 ppb, except
for California, which was analyzed separately. Nationwide
costs, except California, are estimated at $3.9 billion in 2025
for a standard of 70 ppb, and $15 billion for a standard of 65
ppb. The estimated benefits of a strengthened ozone standard
outweigh the estimated costs by as much as a ratio of $3.33 to
$1.
    For decades, ozone pollution has been reduced by the
combined efforts of Federal, state, tribal and local
governments. The costs and benefits of Federal rules are
evaluated during the public process for each rule. More than
forty years of experience with the Clean Air Act has shown that
America can build its economy and create jobs while cutting
pollution to protect the health of our citizens and our
workforce.

    Question 8. High levels of natural background ozone may
cause many otherwise clean states, especially in the West, to
be unable to meet EPA's stringent ozone proposal even with
costly emission controls.

     EPA says it can deal with these concerns through its
``exceptional events'' program. Yet, since 2008, Utah has
submitted 12 exception event demonstrations, and EPA has yet to
approve one. Historically, how many times has the exceptional
exceedance policy been used by the states and EPA? How long and
what was the cost to taxpayers each time it was used? How many
times annually do you expect it to be needed going forward?
     EPA also says it can deal with these concerns through
``Rural Transport Areas.'' Yet EPA has no track record for
Rural Transport Areas under an 8 hour ozone standard like in
the proposal. Why should we think the Agency can use Rural
Transport Areas to provide regulatory relief to states with
high background ozone?

    Response. Existing and upcoming EPA regulations and
guidance will assist states in ensuring background ozone does
not create unnecessary control obligations as they continue
their work to improve air quality.
    Assuming a State can provide an adequate assessment or
demonstration to legally invoke regulatory relief, there are a
few types of CAA-authorized relief that are described in the
ozone NAAQS proposal. As examples, an area may be able to rely
upon the exceptional events provisions of the Act to exclude
certain emissions data from consideration during the process of
area designations under the possible revised NAAQS, which could
impact whether an area is designated nonattainment. An area
also may be able to rely on the international emissions
provisions of the Act when making attainment demonstrations,
which could limit their ultimate control requirements. Finally
the Administrator can determine that certain qualifying
nonattainment areas are Rural Transport Areas, thus eliminating
the need for states to develop an attainment plan. All of these
CAA-authorized provisions have been used in the past for
implementing ozone standards.
    The states typically submit exceptional events
demonstrations between the promulgation of a new or revised
NAAQS and the initial area designations for that NAAQS, in
order avoid designation as a nonattainment area through
exclusion of data affected by exceptional events. The EPA
recognizes the challenges associated with developing,
submitting and reviewing exceptional events demonstration
packages and is actively developing Exceptional Events Rule
revisions and additional guidance on demonstrating ozone-
related exceptional events associated with wildfire, which we
anticipate proposing in the fall of 2015 and finalizing in the
summer of 2016. This schedule will ensure the final rule
revisions and ozone-related guidance are available in advance
of implementation activities (e.g., Governors' designation
recommendations) for any potential new or revised ozone NAAQS.
Because states submit exceptional events demonstration packages
directly to their reviewing EPA regional office, the EPA does
not have a national tracking system for the submission, review,
and expended resources associated with the exceptional events
process. Some air agencies and EPA regions have developed their
own processes, systems, and criteria to track exceptional
event-related information.

    Question 9. Yellowstone national park's current ozone level
is 66ppb----

     Is the Agency considering setting a standard that is
below the current ozone levels at Yellowstone National Park?
     I understand EPA has been criticized regarding the way
background ozone concentrations are calculated and used. What
steps is the agency taking to improve that process?

    Response. Based on a significantly expanded body of
scientific evidence, including more than 1,000 new studies
since the last review of the standards, the EPA is proposing
that the current primary ozone standard set at a level of 0.075
ppm is not requisite to protect public health with an adequate
margin of safety, and that it should be revised to provide
increased public health protection. This proposed conclusion is
supported by the independent group of science experts who form
the Clean Air Science Advisory Committee (CASAC). Specifically,
the EPA is proposing to revise the level of that standard to
within the range of 0.065 ppm to 0.070 ppm to increase public
health protection, including for ``at-risk'' populations such
as children, older adults, and people with asthma or other lung
diseases, against an array of ozone-related adverse health
effects. For short-term ozone exposures, these effects include
decreased lung function, increased respiratory symptoms and
pulmonary inflammation, effects that result in serious
indicators of respiratory morbidity such as emergency
department visits and hospital admissions, and non-accidental
mortality. For long-term ozone exposures, these health effects
include a variety of respiratory morbidity effects and
respiratory mortality.
    Existing and upcoming EPA regulations and guidance will
assist states in ensuring background ozone does not create
unnecessary control obligations as they continue their work to
improve air quality.

    Question 10. I understand that EPA does not exclude Mexican
and Canadian ozone emissions when it determines background
levels of ozone. What could a county in my district due to
control emissions in a foreign country?
    Response. Existing and upcoming EPA regulations and
guidance will assist states in ensuring background ozone does
not create unnecessary control obligations as they continue
their work to improve air quality. For purposes of implementing
the ozone standards, sources of ozone precursor emissions
emanating from outside the U.S. are considered background
sources. The CAA contains attainment planning provisions that
allow states to account for international emissions that are
beyond their control. If used appropriately, these provisions
could limit the ultimate control requirements that would apply
to local sources. These CAA provisions have been used in the
past in implementing the ozone standards.

    Question 11. High levels of ozone transported from Asia and
Mexico may mean that many otherwise clean states, especially in
the West, will be unable to meet EPA's stringent ozone proposal
even with costly emission controls. EPA says it can deal with
these concerns through Clean Air Act provisions on
international transport.

     EPA has been notoriously slow in providing states similar
regulatory relief for natural ozone under the Exceptional
Events Program. Why should states believe that EPA will be any
better in approving regulatory relief for international ozone
transport?
     Will EPA commit to not designate as nonattainment any
counties that fail the proposal's ozone standards because of
international transport?

    Response. Existing and upcoming EPA regulations and
guidance will assist states in ensuring background ozone does
not create unnecessary control obligations as they continue
their work to improve air quality.
    Assuming a State can provide an adequate assessment or
demonstration to legally invoke regulatory relief, there are a
few types of relief that are included in the proposal. As
examples, an area may be able to rely on existing CAA-
authorized provisions to obtain relief from designation as a
nonattainment area, or relief from adopting additional controls
to demonstrate attainment.

    Question 12. EPA halted implementation of the 2008 ozone
standard from 2010-2012 while it reconsidered that standard.
That delay put State implementation of the 2008 ozone standard
well behind the normal schedule. States are now committing time
and money to catch up on the 2008 ozone standard. In fact, EPA
just issued the implementation rules for the 2008 standard on
February 13, 2015. Why is EPA proposing new ozone standards
when it hasn't given states a chance to implement the current
ones?
    Response. Sections 108 and 109 of the Clean Air Act (CAA)
govern the establishment, review, and revision, as appropriate,
of the NAAQS to protect public health and welfare. The CAA
requires the EPA to periodically review the air quality
criteriathe science upon which the standards are based and the
standards themselves. This rulemaking is being conducted
pursuant to these statutory requirements.

    Question 13. EPA chose to project the costs of its proposed
ozone standard to 2025, 8 years after counties will be
designated as nonattainment areas under the proposal.

     What consequences will those counties face while
designated nonattainment?
     Does EPA's modeling capture the cost of lost economic
activity that counties in nonattainment areas will experience
during those 8 years?

    Response. The Clean Air Act provides for a range of actions
to take place when an area is designated nonattainment. The
specifics are discussed in further detail in section VII.4 of
the preamble to the proposed rule (Nonattainment Area
Requirements beginning on 79 FR 75373).
    Consistent with Executive Order 12866, and OMB guidance,
the EPA prepared a Regulatory Impact Analysis accompanying the
proposed updates to the ozone NAAQS that shows the benefits and
costs of illustrative control scenarios that states may choose
in complying. Because states have flexibility in how to meet
their goals, the actions taken to meet the goals may vary from
what is modeled in the illustrative scenarios. Specific
details, including information about how costs and benefits are
estimated for these illustrative scenarios are available in the
RIA (http://www.epa.gov/ttn/ecas/regdata/RIAs/20141125ria.pdf).

    Question 14. EPA chose to project the costs of its proposed
ozone standard to 2025, saying that would be the year in which
most counties would have to attain the standards if granted
compliance extensions.

     Since EPA bases its entire economic analysis on these
assumed extensions, will the Agency commit to extending
compliance deadlines to the maximum extent possible when
finalizing the ozone standards?
     If EPA assumed longer compliance deadlines, shouldn't it
write those compliance extensions into the final rule?

    Response. The EPA intends to take action to provide for
compliance flexibility similar to what has been provided under
prior standards.

    Question 15. EPA reassures that counties won't be
designated as nonattainment areas under its proposed stringent
ozone standards for another 3 years. But won't those new
standards be immediately effective on PSD permits, making it
harder for business to build and expand facilities to create
new jobs?
    Response. New or modified major stationary sources that
must get a PSD permit must show that the project will not cause
or contribute to a violation of a revised ozone standard upon
the effective date of that standard. The EPA has proposed a
grandfathering provision for PSD permit applications that are
administratively complete before the new NAAQS is signed, or
where a draft permit or preliminary determination has been
published before the effective date of a revised standard.
Those in-pipeline permit applications meeting the qualification
criteria in EPA's final rule would not need to be revised in
order to be approved.

    Question 16. EPA has said that most counties won't need to
attain its stringent ozone standards until 2025. But counties
in nonattainment areas will face severe regulatory consequences
in just 3 years, and the new standards become immediately
effective for permits to expand business. EPA seems to want us
to think these proposed standards are a ``next decade''
problem, but aren't they a now problem?
    Response. Approximately 2 years after a standard is
revised, the EPA is required to determine attainment and
nonattainment areas. For areas designated nonattainment,
additional preconstruction permitting requirements must be
implemented and, depending on the severity of the poor air
quality in the area, the State must begin developing attainment
plans for the area. The first attainment deadline under the Act
is 3 years following designation, which would be by the end of
2020 if areas are designated in the fall of 2017. This
attainment deadline would apply only to those areas with air
quality closest to the standard at the time of designation and
such areas would not be required to develop an attainment plan.

    Question 17. EPA can't even point to controls capable of
almost half the emissions reductions needed in the east and all
of the reductions required in California to meet its stringent
proposed ozone standard. This sounds like shoot first, ask
questions later rulemaking. Should we be imposing this much
burden on the American people when EPA doesn't even know how
this rule can be accomplished?
    Response. The U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Whitman v.
American Trucking Associations, 531 U.S. 457 (2001), that under
Section 109 of the Clean Air Act, the EPA may not consider the
costs of implementation in setting National Ambient Air Quality
Standards. The Court indicated specifically that EPA was not to
consider potential job losses due to implementation of a
standard, even if such job losses ``might produce health
losses''. 531 U.S. at 466. Moreover, if EPA were to consider
such costs, it would be ``grounds for vacating the NAAQS,
because the Administrator had not followed the law''. Id. at n.
4.
    Under the Clean Air Act, states ultimately determine what
local measures may be required to address local sources of air
pollution. For that reason, the EPA presents an illustrative
estimation of the costs and benefits of complying with proposed
revisions to a NAAQS. EPA estimates that reducing pollution to
meet a revised ozone NAAQS in 2025 will yield health benefits
of $6.4 to $13 billion annually for a standard of 70 ppb, and
$19 to $38 billion annually for a standard of 65 ppb, except
for California, which was analyzed separately. Nationwide
costs, except California, are estimated at $3.9 billion in 2025
for a standard of 70 ppb, and $15 billion for a standard of 65
ppb. The estimated benefits of a strengthened ozone standard
outweigh the estimated costs by as much as a ratio of $3.33 to
$1.
    For decades, ozone pollution has been reduced by the
combined efforts of Federal, state, tribal and local
governments. More than forty years of experience with the Clean
Air Act has shown that America can build its economy and create
jobs while cutting pollution to protect the health of our
citizens and our workforce.

    Question 18. EPA's modeling for its proposed stringent
ozone standards caps costs for emissions reductions required
from so-called ``unknown controls'' based on costs of known
controls. This defies the basic economics of increasing
marginal costs. Does EPA really believe that the costs of
reaching the highest low-hanging fruit are the same as those to
get the fruit at the top of the tree?
    Response. Following advice from the EPA Advisory Council on
Clean Air Compliance Analysis (COUNCIL), in the 2014 analysis
EPA relied on a methodology to estimate the cost of unknown
controls that used an average cost-per-ton for the needed
emissions reductions. The agency agrees with the COUNCIL that
the approach is both transparent and strikes a balance between
the likelihood that some unidentified abatement would be
achieved at costs that are lower than average and that some
would be achieved at costs that are higher than average.

    Question 19. We hear a lot about the need to repair
``crumbling roads and bridges.'' However, stringent ozone
standards could make it harder for states to show that proposed
highway project ``conform'' with ozone standards. Has EPA
considered the economic and safety impacts that could result if
these stringent ozone standards block crucial transportation
projects?
    Response. Road maintenance and safety projects are exempted
from transportation conformity requirements. The transportation
conformity rule provides exemptions for a number of project
types that address needed repairs and the need to improve
highway safety. These include:

     reconstructing bridges as long as the number of travel
lanes is not increased;
     pavement resurfacing and/or rehabilitation;
     pavement marking;
     projects that correct, improve or eliminate a hazardous
location or feature;
     projects that increase sight distance;
     installation of guardrails, median barriers and crash
cushions;
     lighting improvements; and
     projects that improve safety at railroad crossings.

    The EPA places a high priority in assisting areas to
determine exempt projects and to make required conformity
determinations for other projects.

    Question 20. According to EPA, ozone-forming emissions have
been cut in half in the last three decades. This progress will
continue under current regulations. Wouldn't you agree that
Americans are already enjoying the benefits of cleaner air, and
will enjoy even more future benefits, regardless whether the
existing standards are adjusted?
    Response. The Clean Air Act requires primary NAAQS that are
``requisite to protect the public health'' with an ``adequate
margin of safety.'' The EPA is proposing that the current
primary ozone (O3) standard set at a level of 0.075 ppm does
not meet this requirement, and that it should be revised to
provide increased public health protection. Specifically, the
EPA is proposing to retain the indicator (ozone), averaging
time (8-hour) and form (annual fourth-highest daily maximum,
averaged over 3 years) of the existing primary O3 standard and
is proposing to revise the level of that standard to within the
range of 0.065 ppm to 0.070 ppm. EPA analyses indicate that
most of the country will be able to meet a revised standard
with a level in this range, based on existing Federal control
requirements.

    Question 21. EPA's modeling indicates that its proposed
ozone standards may actually increase mortality in cities like
Houston. Can you please explain how this proposal could end up
increasing deaths in some areas?
    Response. The proposed revisions to the National Ambient
Air Quality Standards for ozone discussed the possibility that
some control strategies designed to reduce the highest ambient
ozone concentrations can also result in increases in relatively
low ambient ozone concentrations. That discussion can be found
at http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2014-12-17/pdf/2014-
28674.pdf. We are currently reviewing comments on this
interaction, and other issues raised by the proposal.
    The proposal, based on extensive scientific evidence, found
that reducing high ozone concentrations will reduce risk--
including risk of ozone-related mortality--broadly across the
country. This includes the risk associated with exposure to
high ozone concentrations in all of the urban areas evaluated
in the risk and exposure assessment.

    Question 22. Ozone is mainly outdoors. Yet most people
spend 90 percent of their time indoors. Do you think this is
why recent published studies found that indoor air quality and
poverty were much more strongly linked to asthma than outdoor
air quality?
    Response. The Clean Air Act directs the EPA to set National
Ambient Air Quality Standards to limit harmful pollutants in
the atmosphere. The EPA's proposed revision to the ozone NAAQS
is based on extensive scientific evidence, including more than
1,000 new studies since the last review of the standards. This
evidence shows that ozone can harm public health and welfare.
The proposed updates will improve public health protection,
particularly for children, the elderly, and people of all ages
who have lung diseases such as asthma.

    Question 23. Only 1 of the 12 studies considered by EPA
show any link between long-term ozone exposure and mortality.
And this study did not find any link in California, where ozone
levels are the highest in the country. Shouldn't we be
concerned that EPA is cherry-picking science to support its
regulatory agenda?
    Response. Based on a significantly expanded body of
scientific evidence, including more than 1,000 new studies
since the last review of the standards, the EPA is proposing
that the current primary ozone standard set at a level of 0.075
ppm is not requisite to protect public health with an adequate
margin of safety, and that it should be revised to provide
increased public health protection. This proposed conclusion is
supported by the independent group of science experts who form
the Clean Air Science Advisory Committee (CASAC). Specifically,
the EPA is proposing to revise the level of that standard to
within the range of 0.065 ppm to 0.070 ppm to increase public
health protection, including for ``at-risk'' populations such
as children, older adults,
    and people with asthma or other lung diseases, against an
array of ozone-related adverse health effects. For short-term
ozone exposures, these effects include decreased lung function,
increased respiratory symptoms and pulmonary inflammation,
effects that result in serious indicators of respiratory
morbidity such as emergency department visits and hospital
admissions, and nonaccidental mortality. For long-term ozone
exposures, these health effects include a variety of
respiratory morbidity effects and respiratory mortality.

    Question 24. I'm concerned that EPA is cherry-picking and
contorting science to support its ozone proposal. For instance,
one study found no statistically significant difference in lung
function in humans exposed to ozone at levels above and below
the standards in EPA's ozone proposal. Yet EPA ``reanalyzed''
that data and decided there was a statistically significant
impact after all leading that study's author to say that EPA
``misinterpreted'' his data. Shouldn't EPA just go where the
science points, rather than trying to shoehorn findings into
its regulatory agenda?
    Response. In reviewing a significantly expanded body of
scientific evidence, including more than 1,000 new studies
since the last review of the standards, the EPA in some
instances conducted further analysis of the data underlying the
studies. This review and these analyses are discussed in the
Integrated Science Assessment, the Health Risk and Exposure
Assessment and the Policy Assessment. Each of these documents
are available at http://www.epa.gov/ttn/naaqs/standards/ozone/
s--o3--index.html. Based on the body of scientific evidence,
the EPA is proposing that the current primary ozone standard
set at a level of 0.075 ppm is not requisite to protect public
health with an adequate margin of safety, and that it should be
revised to provide increased public health protection. This
proposed conclusion is supported by the independent group of
science experts who form the Clean Air Science Advisory
Committee (CASAC).

    Question 25. All of the clinical studies cited by CASAC in
support of the 60 ppb standard were created by the EPA. Yet,
all of the non-EPA literature on health impacts of 60 ppb ozone
cited by CASAC does not support a 60 ppb standard. Is this what
EPA meant when it said that ``increasing uncertainty in the
scientific evidence at lower ozone concentrations'' led it to
not include a 60 ppb standard in the ozone proposal?
    Response. Compared to ozone standard levels from 65 to 70
ppb, the extent to which standard levels below 65 ppb could
result in further public health improvements becomes notably
less certain. For example, as explained in the preamble to the
proposed rule (79 FR 75309), there are uncertainties associated
with the adversity of exposures to 60 ppb of ozone,
particularly single occurrence of such exposures; air quality
analyses in locations of multicity epidemiologic studies; and
epidemiology-based risk estimates. The EPA determined that it
is not appropriate to place significant weight on these factors
or to use them to support the appropriateness of standard
levels below 65 ppb.

    Question 26. EPA has released maps showing only the
projected counties in non-attainment in 2025.
     Under EPA guidance does the agency designate non-
attainment area boundaries starts with metropolitan area as the
``presumptive'' nonattainment area? Why are your maps
inconsistent with your guidance?
    Response. The EPA has not yet issued guidance for
designating areas for a potentially revised ozone standard, but
intends to do so shortly after any standard is revised.
Nonattainment area boundaries for a revised ozone standard will
depend on a number of factors that are currently highly
uncertain.

    Question 27. How many counties still do not meet the 1997
ozone standards? How about the 2008 standards? Doesn't it make
sense to work on attaining the existing standards, the tightest
standards ever, before promulgating new standards?
    Response. The 1997 ozone standard was revoked on April 6,
2015. However, before that revocation, as of April 1, 2015,
there were 7 designated nonattainment areas (consisting of 36
counties) that had not yet attained the standard based on
preliminary 2014 ozone monitoring data. For the 2008 ozone
standard, there are, as of April 1, 2015, 28 designated
nonattainment areas (consisting of 163 counties) that have not
yet attained the standard based on preliminary 2014 ozone
monitoring data.
    The EPA sets the National Ambient Air Quality Standards at
a level that is requisite to protect the public health and
welfare, based on the best available science. The U.S. Supreme
Court ruled in Whitman v. American Trucking Associations, 531
U.S. 457 (2001), that under Section 109 of the Clean Air Act,
the EPA may not consider the costs of implementation in setting
standards.

    Question 28. Why does EPA leave California off of its maps
and analyses? If California is being give a longer period of
time to attain the standards, shouldn't other places in the
country be granted that latitude as well? How much ($/ton) are
NOx offset reductions selling for in Houston? Los Angeles?
Other places?
    Response. While EPA analyzed costs and benefits for
California separately from the rest of the United States, all
of these analyses are described in full in the Regulatory
Impact Analysis for the ozone proposal. The maximum amount of
time a nonattainment area has to attain the standards is
dictated by specific provisions of the Clean Air Act, and
depends on the area's classification. Because a number of
California counties likely would have attainment dates ranging
from 2032 to late 2037, California is not shown on maps that
illustrate projected attainment status in 2025.
    The EPA does not centrally track or collect data on the
selling prices of emissions offsets. Offset transactions are
typically private transactions between emissions sources and
the price paid per ton of emissions used for offsets is not
required to be reported or disclosed to the EPA by permit
applicants.


                                climate


    Question 1. The budget request includes a $4 Billion
incentive program for states that reduce CO2
emissions beyond the existing source proposal.

     How do you propose to implement this program?
     Do you plan to send Congress a legislative proposal?
     If the proposal is to give states money if they go beyond
EPA mandates, will the result be to transfer taxpayer dollars
away from states with large emission reduction burdens under
your plan to states that have a smaller burden. For example,
Vermont has no emissions reduction obligation under your plan
because its power plants are small. So, would you automatically
transfer taxpayer money from Southeastern and Southwestern
states to Vermont?

    Response. The fiscal year President's Budget includes an
incentive fund for States choosing to go beyond the Clean Power
Plan, which will be finalized this summer. The Clean Power
State Incentive Fund will provide $4 billion to support States
exceeding the minimum requirements established in the final
Clean Power Plan for the pace and extent of carbon pollution
reductions from the power sector. This funding will enable
States to invest in a range of activities that complement and
advance the Clean Power Plan, including efforts to address
disproportionate impacts from environmental pollution in low-
income communities and support for businesses to expand efforts
in energy efficiency, renewable energy, and combined heat and
power through, for example, grants and investments in much-
needed infrastructure.
    Each State with an emissions reduction goal under the Clean
Power Plan will have a reserved portion of the Fund, based on a
combination of population and State power sector emissions.
States across the country are well-positioned to act quickly
and resolutely to reduce carbon pollution from the power
sector--beyond the requirements of the final Clean Power Plan.
If a State elects not to participate, its funding allocation
will return to the Treasury. Additional details on the Fund
will be made available this summer.
    Question 2. With respect to the Clean Power Plan, your
justification statement says: ``In fiscal year 6, the EPA will
encounter a staggering workload to implement these rules and
agency resources have been shifted to help meet the demand.
Because of the breadth, complexity and precedent-setting nature
of work, the agency expects a marked increase in demands for
legal counsel in both headquarters and Regional Offices. In
addition, each EPA action is expected to be challenged in
court, which will require skilled and experienced attorneys
specialized in the Clean Air Act to devote significant
resources to defense of these actions.''
     In your own budget justification statement you say that
these rules will result in a ``staggering workload'' to
implement and defend these two rules. Don't you think those
taxpayer dollars would be better spent increasing funding to
states to implement existing programs rather than spending it
on lawyers?
    Response. Successfully addressing climate change will
require the EPA and State governments to work together, and the
President's proposed budget provides additional resources for
that work, both to the Agency and to the states.
    With additional legal counseling resources, the EPA would
provide significant benefits to our partners, stakeholders, and
regulated communities. For example, counseling attorneys work
closely with their program clients in rule development to
ensure stakeholder input is appropriately considered. EPA
counseling lawyers are also a vital resource to States as
States develop implementation plans under the Clean Air Act.
    The President's proposed budget also provides significant
resources for States. It includes $25 million in grants for
States to develop their Clean Power Plan strategies, and sets
up a Clean Power State Incentive fund of $4 billion.

    Question 3. Recent correspondence between your agency and
the House Energy and Commerce Committee indicated EPA has not
``explicitly modeled the temperature impacts of the Clean Power
Plan'' and could not State what, if any impact the rule would
have on global temperatures or sea rise levels.
     Why hasn't EPA done the modeling? Is it a matter of
budgeting?
     Why is your agency attempting to impose this extremely
complex rule and spend billions of taxpayer dollars to address
global warming when you haven't even checked to see if the rule
would actually achieve your global warming goals?
    Response. The EPA included with the proposed Clean Power
Plan a Regulatory Impact Analysis that estimated the total
monetized climate-related benefits and costs of the rule,
following applicable statutes, Executive Orders, and other
guidance. Although the EPA has not explicitly modeled the
temperature or sea level rise impacts of this rule, the Clean
Power Plan is an important and significant contribution to
emission reductions, thereby slowing the rate of global warming
and associated impacts.

    Question 4. Your budget would eliminate funding under the
Indoor Radon Abatement Act which authorizes grants to states to
address radon (-$8 million) even though indoor radon is the
second-leading cause of lung cancer and the leading cause of
lung cancer for non-smokers and the funding was targeted this
funding to support states with the greatest populations at
highest risk. According to your Budget in Brief, indoor radon
causes an estimated 21,000 lung cancer deaths annually in the
U.S. Carbon dioxide causes no deaths.
     Why would the budget propose spending $279 million to
rework the U.S. energy economy (climate regulations) while
ignoring real environmental threats?
    Response. Over the past 23 years, the State Indoor Radon
Grant program has provided funds to support states's efforts to
reduce risks from radon exposure to establish their own
programs. Because exposure to radon gas continues to be an
important risk to human health, in fiscal year the
    EPA will continue to focus on reducing radon risk in homes
and schools, including through partnerships with the private
sector, remaining State programs and public health groups, as
well as driving action at the national level with other Federal
agencies, through the Federal Radon Action Plan. The EPA also
will continue information dissemination, participation in the
development of codes and standards, and social marketing
techniques aimed at informing the public on the risks of radon.

    Question 5. Section 110(c) of the Clean Air Act requires
EPA to issue a Federal implementation Plan (FIP) if a State
does not submit a State Implementation Plan (SIP), does not
submit a satisfactory SIP or does not make a satisfactory SIP
revision (42 U.S.C. 7410(c)). Please provide a list of
enforcement mechanisms with cites to the relative legal
authority the EPA will use to enforce all components of a
Federal plan on a State that does not does not submit a SIP,
does not submit a satisfactory SIP--in whole or in part--or
fails to make a satisfactory revision that meets the criteria
of the proposed Clean Power Plan.
    Response. Under Section 111(d) the EPA is proposing a two-
part process where the EPA sets state-specific goals to lower
carbon pollution from power plants, and then the states must
develop plans to meet those goals. States develop plans to meet
their goals, but EPA is not prescribing a specific set of
measures for states to put in their plans. This gives states
flexibility. States will choose what measures, actions, and
requirements to include in their plans, and demonstrate how
these will result in the needed reductions. The Clean Air Act
provides for EPA to write a Federal plan if a State does not
put an approvable State plan in place. In response to requests
from states and stakeholders since the proposed Clean Power
Plan was issued, EPA announced in January 2015 that we will be
starting the regulatory process to develop a rule that would
set forth a proposed Federal plan and could provide an example
for states as they develop their own plans. EPA's strong
preference remains for states to submit their own plans that
are tailored to their specific needs and priorities. The agency
expects to issue the proposed Federal plan for public review
and comment in summer 2015.

    Question 6. During the hearing, I asked you if the EPA
would consider withholding Federal highway funding if a State
that does not submit a SIP, does not submit a satisfactory
SIP--in whole or in part--or fails to make a satisfactory
revision that meets the criteria of the proposed Clean Power
Plan. You responded,
    ``Ms. McCarthy. This is not a traditional State SIP under
the national ambient air quality standards. There are other
processes for us to work with States. Clearly our hope is that
States will provide the necessary plans. If not, there will be
a Federal system in place to allow us to move forward.''
    Will you clarify for the record whether EPA would consider
withholding Federal highway funding to enforce any elements of
the proposed Clean Power Plan?
    Response. When the EPA finalizes the Clean Power Plan we
will be very clear that sanctions will not be imposed for a
state's failure to submit or enforce a State plan under the
Clean Power Plan.


                      waters of the united states


    Question 1. Please provide me with examples where EPA or
the Corps has used a groundwater connection to establish
jurisdiction over a body of water that has no surface
connection, direct or indirect, to a navigable water. For any
such examples, please also provide the distance between the
body of water that lacks such a surface connection and the
nearest water of the United States. Please exclude any
allegations that a groundwater connection establishes the
existence of a point source discharge where the body of water
with no surface connection was itself determined to be a point
source, rather than a water of the United States.
    Response. The agencies existing regulations and guidance
allow for establishing that a wetland is adjacent to
jurisdictional tributary based on the presence of a confined
surface or shallow subsurface connection. This connection would
then serve as the basis for determining whether a significant
nexus with a downstream traditional navigable water is present.
This is explicitly recognized in the agencies' 2008 (post-
Rapanos) guidance documents. Federal courts have upheld
jurisdiction consistent with this regulation and guidance,
relying on a groundwater connection as the basis for a
significant nexus finding. See Northern California River Watch
v. city of Healdsburg. The agencies make clear in the final
Clean Water Rule that groundwater is never jurisdictional under
the Clean Water Act.

    Question 2. Is it currently the national policy of either
EPA or the Corps of Engineers to establish jurisdiction over
all wetlands in flood plain?
    Response. No. Existing law and policy requires the agencies
to determine, on a case-specific basis, whether or not a
particular wetland located in the floodplain is jurisdictional.
Location in the floodplain does not itself make a wetland
jurisdictional.

    Question 3. Is it currently the national policy of either
EPA or the Corps of Engineers to establish jurisdiction over
all waters in flood plain?
    Response. No. Existing law and policy requires the agencies
to determine, on a case-specific basis, whether or not a
particular water located in the floodplain is jurisdictional.
Location in the floodplain does not itself make a water
jurisdictional.


                          hydraulic fracturing


    Question 1. The EPA continues its study into the
relationship between drinking water and hydraulic fracturing,
which was initiated in 2010. Well over $20 million has been
spent on this study and the timeline continues to slip. In
fact, the draft assessment report was expected in December 2014
yet today, there is no indication when this will be released.
     What is the current timeline for release of the EPA's
drinking water study?
     Will the report undergo interagency review prior to its
release? If so, which agencies will be a part of the review? If
not, why not?
     After the draft assessment report is released, what is
the timeline moving forward?

    Response. To date, the EPA's hydraulic fracturing drinking
water study has produced 25 scientific products, including 12
EPA technical reports. Additionally, on June 4, 2015, the EPA
released the draft hydraulic fracturing drinking water
assessment report. The assessment is a state-of-the-science
integration and synthesis of over 950 publications and sources
of data. The draft assessment was released for public comment,
and submitted to the EPA Science Advisory Board for external,
independent peer review.
    The EPA shared findings from the draft hydraulic fracturing
drinking water assessment report with other Federal agencies
and departments prior to the release of the assessment on June
4.
    The draft assessment report was released for public comment
and peer review on June 4, 2015. The EPA Science Advisory Board
will conduct the external peer review of the draft assessment.
Their preliminary schedule for review includes several
teleconferences and an October 28-30, 2015 meeting of the SAB
ad hoc review panel. The SAB anticipates release of the final
peer review report in spring 2016. After receipt of the SAB's
peer review report, EPA will finalize the hydraulic fracturing
drinking water assessment report. The final report will reflect
SAB input and the input of submitted public comments. The EPA
anticipates completing the final assessment report in 2016.

    Question 2. You've said that hydraulic fracturing can be
done safely and have agreed with former EPA Administrator Lisa
Jackson that there have been no confirmed cases of hydraulic
fracturing impacting drinking water. The White House Council on
Economic Advisors released a report last week that touted the
economic benefits because of the increase in domestic oil and
natural gas and clearly linked the production increases to the
use of hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling. What is
your vision for getting the American public to understand that
hydraulic fracturing is safe and that fracking has unlocked an
American energy revolution that has lowered all Americans's
energy prices, created jobs, helping lower GHG emissions and
revitalizing such industries as the manufacturing, steel and
chemical sectors?
    Response. The EPA's vision is to make sure that the
American public has the best scientific information available
to understand the potential impacts of hydraulic fracturing
activities on drinking water resources. Once EPA responds to
public and SAB peer review comments and finalizes the
assessment, EPA expects that it will be a critical resource for
State regulators, tribes, local communities, and industry who
can use the information to better identify how best to protect
public health and drinking water resources.
    The hydraulic fracturing drinking water assessment report
identified potential vulnerabilities to drinking water
resources due to hydraulic fracturing activities. The draft
assessment concluded that there are both above and below ground
mechanisms by which hydraulic fracturing activities have the
potential to impact drinking water resources. These mechanisms
include water withdrawals in time of or in areas with low water
availability, spills of hydraulic fracturing fluids and
produced water; fracturing directly into underground drinking
water resources; below ground migration of liquids and gases;
and inadequate treatment and discharge of waste water.
    We found specific instances where one or more mechanisms
led to impacts on drinking water resources, including
contamination of drinking water wells. The number of cases,
however, was small compared to the number of hydraulically
fractured wells.
    This finding could reflect a rarity of effects on drinking
water resources, but may also be due to other limiting factors.
These factors include: insufficient pre-and post-fracturing
data on the quality of drinking water resources; the paucity of
long-term systematic studies; the presence of other sources of
contamination precluding a definitive link between hydraulic
fracturing and an impact; and the inaccessibility of some
information on hydraulic fracturing activities and potential
impacts.

    Question 3. In the draft fiscal year budget proposal, it
states that EPA will respond to peer review comments from the
Agency's Science Advisory Board (SAB) in order to finalize the
study. It further suggests that the report will provide a
synthesis of the State of the science, including the results of
research focused on whether hydraulic fracturing affects
drinking water resources, and if so, will identify the driving
factors.
     Clearly you already have a plan for additional research.
Can you share those plans?
     More importantly, will the Agency actually consider the
recommendations of its own Science Advisory Board in this
process, particularly if those recommendations do not align
with EPA's own research initiatives, which you just addressed?

    Response. The President's fiscal year budget request
includes $4.0M to address the peer review and public comments
received on the Hydraulic Fracturing Drinking Water Assessment
report, including performing additional analyses in response to
these comments.
    The Department of Energy, Department of Interior, United
States Geological Service, and EPA developed the Federal
Multiagency Collaboration on Unconventional Oil and Gas (UOG)
to coordinate on-going and future high priority research
associated with safely and prudently developing onshore shale
gas, tight gas, shale oil, and tight oil resources. The three
agencies shared the ``Federal Multiagency Collaboration on
Unconventional Oil and Gas Research--A Strategy for Research
and Development'' (Strategy) in July 2014 (http://
unconventional.energy.gov/pdf/Multiagency--UOG--Research--
Strategy.pdf). Separate from the hydraulic fracturing drinking
water assessment, resources are requested to further research
outlined in the Strategy to better understand and mitigate the
potential impacts of UOG practices.
    Throughout the development of hydraulic fracturing drinking
water assessment, the EPA has actively engaged input from the
agency's Science Advisory Board (SAB). A previous SAB panel
provided comment on the hydraulic fracturing study plan
published in 2011. A separate SAB panel provided comment on the
hydraulic fracturing drinking water study progress report
published in 2012. The same SAB ad hoc panel will review the
draft assessment report. The external peer review by the SAB is
expected to provide detailed comments and suggestions
concerning the draft assessment. EPA will consider and evaluate
all comments received from the SAB. SAB comments, along with
comments received from the public, will help inform and guide
the EPA as it develops the final draft of the assessment.

    Question 4. Director McCarthy, the President's new economic
report says that 1) ``natural gas is already playing a central
role in the transition to a clean energy future,'' 2) that an
effective regulatory structure for addressing environmental
concerns already ``exists primarily at the State and local
level,'' and 3) that unconventional natural gas production
technology unleashed in the U.S. ``can help the rest of the
world reduce its dependence on high-carbon fuels.'' Given this
positive view from the White House, which is supported by a
broad scientific consensus, how do you intend to ensure that
your agency's proposed regulations on methane will not short-
circuit the U.S. energy revolution that is driving so much job
creation?
     Can we assume that the upcoming EPA study on hydraulic
fracturing will not conflict with this latest White House
report that recognizes the clear advantages of unconventional
energy development?

    Response. Responsible development of America's shale gas
resources offers important economic, energy security, and
environmental benefits. Recognizing this, in April 2012,
President Obama signed E.O. 13605, Supporting Safe and
Responsible Development of Unconventional Domestic Natural Gas
Resources, which, among other things, charges Federal agencies
to pursue multidisciplinary, coordinated research. The EPA is
working with other Federal agencies, states and other
stakeholders to understand and address potential concerns with
hydraulic fracturing so the public has confidence that natural
gas production will proceed in a safe and responsible manner.
    The EPA's study of the potential impacts of hydraulic
fracturing for oil and gas on drinking water resources in the
United States reflects the multiple, complex activities
associated with the use of water in hydraulic fracturing,
beginning with water acquisition and ending with the wastewater
treatment and disposal. When completed, the products from the
EPA's hydraulic fracturing study are intended to provide
information needed to inform decisionmakers involved with
ensuring that hydraulic fracturing activities do not impact the
nation's drinking water resources.

    Question 5. In February 2014 the EPA's IG sent a memo to
the EPA Office of Water outlining an initiative the IG has
underway that will ``determine and evaluate what regulatory
authority is available to the EPA and states, identify
potential threats to water resources from hydraulic fracturing,
and evaluate the EPA's and states' responses to them.'' Do you
consider this a duplication of the EPA's efforts as it relates
to the multi-year and multi-million dollar hydraulic fracturing
and water study currently in process at the EPA and if not,
then how do these studies differ? Hasn't EPA independently done
this type of evaluation (see the letter from EPA to NRDC)?
    Response. The OIG does not consider its evaluation in this
case as duplicative of the study by the EPA's Office of
Research and Development (ORD). ORD's Final Study Plan is
scoped to the hydraulic fracturing water lifecycle, defined by
ORD to include water acquisition, chemical mixing, injection,
flowback and produced waters, and wastewater treatment. The OIG
will not undertake a review of these matters. The OIG is not
conducting independent scientific evaluations, laboratory
studies or toxicological studies as planned in ORD's study.


                              srf program


    Question 1. It is my understanding that since the program's
inception in 1988, the Clean Water State Revolving Loan Funds
have provided a total of $105 billion in assistance, leveraging
Federal capitalization grants totaling approximately $36.2
billion. Further, since the program's inception in 1997,
Drinking Water State Revolving Loan Funds have provided
approximately $33 billion in assistance, leveraging Federal
capitalization grants totaling approximately $19 billion. This
means that for every Federal dollar invested in the Clean Water
SFR community wastewater systems have received nearly $3
dollars in assistance and for every dollar in the Drinking
Water SRF community water systems have received approximately
$1.75 dollars in assistance.

     Do you agree that the SRF program has been among the most
successful programs we have in government?
     It that is so, why does the President's budget
perennially underfund these programs?

    Response. Yes, and the Administration strongly supports the
successful Clean Water and Drinking Water State Revolving Loan
Fund programs. The President's fiscal year budget request
recognizes that both SRF programs report long-running
significant water infrastructure needs. In fiscal year 6, the
Administration is requesting a total of $2.3 billion for the
SRF programs--$1.186 billion for the DWSRF and $1.116 billion
CWSRF. In addition, the fiscal year request includes $50
million in technical assistance, training, and other efforts to
enhance the capacity of communities and states to plan and
finance drinking water and wastewater infrastructure
improvements. The fiscal year budget also requests funds to lay
the groundwork for a Water Infrastructure Finance and
Innovation Act of 2014 (WIFIA) program that would provide
additional assistance. EPA has also launched the Water
Infrastructure and Resilience Finance Center to help
communities address their wastewater, drinking water, and
stormwater needs within constrained budgets, particularly
through innovative financing and by building resilience to
climate change.

    Question 2. Under the Clean Water Act, EPA is supposed to
send a report to Congress on the funding needs for both
wastewater and drinking water infrastructure. The last report
to
    Congress on wastewater needs was based on the 2008 Clean
Water Needs Survey. The estimate of need in that survey--$298
billion over 20 years--is woefully out of date. That estimate
is based on cities' own capital improvement plans. It does not
reflect new mandates like the hugely costly sewer overflow
control measures that EPA is imposing on cities in enforcement
actions or costly new requirements for nutrient reductions and
stormwater controls.
    By failing to provide an updated estimate of needs, EPA is
doing a disservice to Congress, to cities, and to itself. We
all need reliable information to make good decisions and EPA is
required by law to update the needs survey every 4 years.
     When will EPA provide Congress with the updated the Clean
Water Needs Survey?

    Response. The 2012 Clean Water Needs Survey Report to
Congress is currently undergoing review. When the review is
complete and the Report is cleared, it will be immediately
provided to Congress.

    Question 3. We all know that the needs for both water and
wastewater are huge. According to the U.S. Conference of
Mayors, cities are spending $115 billion a year to provide
water and wastewater services and meet Federal mandates. So,
the proposal to provide a combined $2.3 billion for the Clean
Water and Drinking Water State Revolving Funds is a drop in the
bucket. Since the Federal Government does not provide funding
to meet those mandates, I think it is important to take a hard
look at how we are asking cities to spend their citizen's
money.
     We all support clean and safe water. But, I am told that
EPA enforcement officials extract penalties on top of
commitments of hundreds of millions of dollars to address sewer
overflows. Is that right?
     I also am told that EPA enforcement officials will
require complete elimination over sewer overflows if they think
a city can pay for it, when a less expensive approach could
meet water quality standards. Is that right? Is EPA requiring
cities to do more than meet the standards that states have set
and EPA has approved that will protect water quality?

    Response. Sewer overflows, which contain raw sewage, may
present significant environmental and human health risks to
communities. Raw sewage contains bacteria, viruses, parasites,
industrial wastewater, and inhalable mold and fungi which can
be particularly problematic for children and the elderly.
    The ability to assess a penalty when appropriate is
important both to ensure future compliance and meet the
standard under which courts review such consent decrees. Under
the EPA's current approach, the agency tailors the terms of a
settlement agreement, including any civil penalty, to the
individual facts and circumstances of each case. Moreover, in
determining appropriate civil penalties, the EPA uses the
significant flexibility provided under the EPA's Clean Water
Act Penalty Policy (including consideration of a city's
specific financial circumstances) to substantially mitigate
civil penalties in municipal cases. The agency remains
committed to ensuring that we take into account the individual
circumstances of each community, so that we can meet the
objective we share with every community to achieve clean water
and encourage future compliance with the Clean Water Act in a
way that makes sense for that community.
    For combined sewer systems, the level of control is
governed by the Combined Sewer Overflow Control Policy, with
which each ``permit, order, or decree'' for municipal combined
sewer system discharges ``shall conform'' as required by
Congress in section 402(q) of the Clean Water Act.\1\ The Clean
Water Act requires permit holders to meet both water quality
and technology standards and either can govern the requirements
for compliance.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\Link to CSO Control Policy: http://water.epa.gov/polwaste/npdes/
cso/upload/owm0111.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Separate sanitary sewer systems must be designed to contain
and treat raw sewage generated by a community. An enforceable
requirement of National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permits is that cities properly operate and maintain
their sewer collection and treatment systems.

    Question 4. Given the enormous cost of meeting water and
wastewater mandates, affordability is a significant issue. It
is my understanding that at EPA Headquarters, you talk about
giving cities more time to meet mandates; you talk about
adaptive management; and you talk about using green
infrastructure alternatives. However, when they bring
enforcement actions against cities, EPA regions and
Headquarters enforcement officials are not providing these
flexibilities.

     How are you addressing the real affordability concerns of
cities?
     Do you think your enforcement officials should try to
extract every last dollar from a city that you claim they can
afford even if spending more money will not provide additional
water quality benefits?
     If a city steps up and agrees to spend hundreds of
millions or in some cases billions of dollars, do you think it
is also appropriate to impose penalties on that city when the
penalty will simply go to the U.S. Treasury and will reduce the
amount of funding available to help improve the environment?

    Response. The EPA is sensitive to the significant
investment cities must make to ensure clean and safe water. The
EPA's guidance ``Combined Sewer Overflows Guidance for
Financial Capability Assessment and Schedule Development'' (FCA
Guidance), adopted in March 1997, provides a flexible framework
for considering the site-specific factors that impact a given
community's rate base.\1\ The guidance encourages communities
to consider and present any other documentation of their unique
financial circumstances so that it may be considered as part of
the analysis. These flexibilities were further clarified in
November 2014, in the EPA's ``Financial Capability Assessment
Framework for Municipal Clean Water Act Requirements,'' which
was developed with significant input from a variety of
stakeholders including the United States Conference of Mayors,
the National League of Cities, and the National Association of
Counties.\2\ As detailed in the EPA's January 13, 2013,
``Assessing Financial Capability for Municipal Clean Water Act
Requirements'' Memorandum, nothing in the Federal Clean Water
Act prohibits communities from introducing a sewer rate
structure based on differential household incomes.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\CSO Guidance for FCA and Schedule Development: http://
water.epa.gov/polwaste/npdes/cso/upload/csofc.pdf
    \2\FCA Framework Memo: http://water.epa.gov/polwaste/npdes/cso/
upload/municipal--fca--framework.pdf
    \3\Link to Assessing Financial Capability for Municipal Clean Water
Act Requirements Memo: http://water.epa.gov/polwaste/npdes/stormwater/
upload/sw--regionalmemo.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Section 204(b)(1) of the Clean Water Act recognizes the use
of lower rates for low-income residential users as satisfying
the stipulation that recipients of services must pay their
proportionate share. The EPA's regulations at 40 C.F.R. Section
35.2140(i) reflect this and authorize low-income residential
user rates. Local officials have a great deal of latitude under
these regulations and the EPA continues to encourage
communities to consider and adopt rate structures that ensure
that lower-income households continue to be able to afford
vital wastewater services.
    The EPA utilizes its Clean Water Act Penalty Policy to
provide flexibility to substantially mitigate civil penalties
in municipal cases, including taking into account a city's
specific financial circumstances.\4\ The agency remains
committed to ensuring that we consider the individual
circumstances of each community so that we can meet our shared
objective of achieving clean water and encouraging future
compliance with the Clean Water Act in a way that makes sense
for individual communities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \4\CWA Penalty Policy: http://www2.epa.gov/sites/production/files/
documents/cwapol.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Question 5. I am very concerned that the way EPA looks at
affordability when they decide what mandates to impose on
communities means that our poorest citizens will end up paying
10 percent or more of their income on sewer bills.
    Last Congress, in Title V of the Water Resources Reform and
Development Act, we amended the Clean Water Act to give
direction on how to identify what communities would experience
a significant hardship raising the revenue to finance projects
to meet Clean Water Act mandates. One of the criteria that we
listed in the statute is whether the area is considered
economically distressed under the Public Works and Economic
Development Act. Under this Act, a community or area within a
larger political boundary is economically distressed when --
     the per capita income at 80 percent or less than national
average,
     unemployment is 1 percent or more greater than national
average, or
     there is an actual or threatened severe unemployment or
economic adjustment.

    This information is provided by the community and must be
accepted unless the Secretary of Commerce determines it is
inaccurate.
     Will EPA also incorporate this approach into your
evaluation of affordability when taking enforcement action?

    Response. The EPA is committed to implementing the Clean
Water Act requirements in a sustainable manner, and will
continue to work with permit holders toward our shared goals of
clean water. The EPA's enforcement program encourages permit
holders to submit any documentation that would create a more
accurate and complete picture of their financial capability,
which could include the type of information listed below. The
EPA's ``Financial Capability Assessment Framework for Municipal
Clean Water Act Requirements'' provides examples of information
that may prove relevant in negotiating schedules.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ FCA Framework Memo: http://water.epa.gov/polwaste/npdes/cso/
upload/municipal--fca--framework.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------


                     technical assistance to states


    Question 1. In EPA's fiscal year Budget Request, the Agency
did not request any funds for the EPA technical assistance
competitive grant program. As you know, this program provides
small and rural communities with the training and technical
assistance necessary to improve water quality and provide safe
drinking water. Many communities count on this program to
assist them in complying with Federal regulations when
operating drinking and wastewater treatment facilities. These
communities believe that is the most effective program to aid
in compliance with the requirements of both the Clean Water Act
and the Safe Drinking Water Act. In the past Congress has
agreed and from fiscal year--fiscal year appropriated $12.7
million for the program. Given its success and importance to so
many communities across the country, why is EPA is not
requesting any funds to support this grant program in fiscal
year 6?
    Response. Answer: Assisting small and rural communities in
compliance with water regulations is very much a priority for
this Administration. The EPA's fiscal year budget requests
$1.186 billion for the Drinking Water State Revolving Fund
(DWSRF) program, which can be used to provide special
assistance to systems serving 10,000 or fewer customers. For
example, States are required to provide a minimum of 15 percent
of the funds available for loan assistance to small systems to
help address infrastructure needs. The DWSRF also allows states
a 2 percent small system technical assistance set-aside to
provide assistance to small and rural water systems. The 2
percent DWSRF set-aside is used by nearly every State to
support their small systems and several states use these funds
for non-profit State affiliates.
    In fiscal year 6, the EPA is also requesting additional
resources as part of the agency's infrastructure investment
which will enable states to augment their roles and
participation in building small drinking water system
capabilities and partnerships. For example, an additional $9
million is requested to expand upon existing technical,
managerial, and financial capability programs, and develop
additional tools and partnerships to promote sound asset
management, as well as strengthen State resources to engage in
these activities. In addition, a $9 million increase is
requested to provide technical assistance for small systems to
plan and facilitate partnership, regionalization, or
consolidation agreements. The EPA also is requesting an
increase of $7.7 million in the Public Water System Supervision
funding in order to enhance State and tribal efforts to provide
increased operator training and technical assistance to small
communities so they can acquire the knowledge and expertise
needed to properly operate drinking water systems and therefore
protect public health.

    Question 2. You have requested $46 million and 13 new FTES
for an unauthorized program to improve climate resilience for
water and wastewater facilities. In contrast, you have
requested only $5 million for fiscal year out of the EPM
account to set up the implementing the newly authorized Water
Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Authority (WIFIA), but no
money out of the STAG account to actually implement it. How can
you explain the disparities in these requests? What does this
say about your priorities?
    Response. The $46 million and additional FTEs identified in
the President's fiscal year budget, along with requests for the
State Revolving Fund programs and preparation for WIFIA,
reflect a priority to invest in our nation's infrastructure.
Activities within the $46 million include:

     Water Infrastructure and Resilience Finance Center--
Assist communities across the country improve their wastewater,
drinking water, and stormwater systems, particularly through
innovative financing and by building resilience to extreme
weather events.
     Capacity Building--Expand upon existing technical,
managerial, and financial capability programs, and develop
additional tools and partnerships to promote sound asset
management.
     Integrated Planning--Expand community assistance in
developing integrated plans, and to provide support for a
limited number of implementation projects.
     Small System Partnerships--Provide technical assistance
for small systems to plan and facilitate partnerships,
regionalization, or consolidation agreements. Disseminate best
practices or model partnership efforts by states and towns.
     Full Cost Pricing--Provide technical assistance to
communities on the adoption of pricing structures that cover a
system's full capital and operations and maintenance costs.

    Also, the Administration's request for continued WIFIA
startup efforts in fiscal year will lay the groundwork for a
WIFIA program that would provide additional infrastructure
assistance.


                     new definition of flood plain


    Question  On January 30, 2015, the President signed a new
Executive Order (EO 13690) that changed the existing flood
plain management policy that has been in effect since 1977.
With these changes, the policy applies to all agencies and all
Federal actions and flood plain is now defined as either the
500 year flood plain or a larger area based on climate
modeling.

     Will this new definition affect the projects that states
can fund using the State Revolving Loan Funds?
     Will this new definition affect the type, size, or
location of infrastructure that EPA requires cities to build to
treat wastewater or to address sewer overflows under
enforcement agreements?
     Will this new definition affect the conditions attached
to municipal stormwater permits?
     What was EPA's involvement in developing this Executive
Order?
     What outreach efforts were made before signing this
Executive Order to State and local governments?

    Response. Executive Order 13690 (EO 13690), which amended
Executive Order 11988 on Floodplain Management, gives agencies
flexibility to select one of three approaches for establishing
the flood elevation and hazard area they use in siting, design,
and construction. First, agencies may use the elevation and
flood hazard area that result from freeboard of 2 or 3 feet,
depending on criticality. Second, agencies may also use the
elevation and flood hazard area that result from a climate-
informed science approach. Finally, agencies may use the area
subject to flooding by the 0.2 percent annual chance flood. EO
13690 does not define the flood plain as ``either the 500 year
flood plain or a larger area based on climate modeling.''
    Following the development and issuance of the Final Revised
Guidelines for EO 13690, which the public comment period
recently closed (May 6), the EPA will begin the process for
implementing EO 13690. Until that process is complete, it would
be premature to respond to questions regarding effects on
programs or projects.
    The EPA participated in the interagency group that assisted
in the development of the Executive Order and Draft Revised
Guidelines. As one of the agencies in the interagency group,
the EPA participated in engagement efforts with states, local
governments, and other stakeholders regarding flood risk policy
issues.


                               stormwater


    Question  EPA has announced that it has abandoned its plans
to develop a national storm water rulemaking that would have
tried to expand your authority to regulate not only pollutants,
but also the actual flow of water. That is not surprising given
the fact that courts have made it clear that the Clean Water
Act does not give EPA any authority to regulate water flows.
However, it is my understanding that your agency is continuing
to advance this agenda by regulating water flows in individual
permits.

     Will you commit to me that your agency will use Clean
Water Act permits to regulate the discharge of pollutants only
and not the flow of water?

    Response. The EPA and the States responsible for
administering the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permits will continue to review and reissue
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) permits under the
authorities governing stormwater discharges in Section 402(p)
of the Clean Water Act (CWA).


                          attorneys/workforce


    Question 1. Administrator McCarthy, the President's budget
request seeks an additional $10 million that would go to hire
almost 40 additional attorneys to work at EPA. More than $3.5
million would go to hire 20 new attorneys who would be devoted
to supporting the Clean Power Plan alone.
    At a House committee hearing last week, you stated that
these attorneys would not be ``litigation attorneys'' and
instead would be used to help with reviewing permits and
assisting states to set up their programs.
    However, your own budget justification says these
additional attorneys and needed because, ``In addition, each
EPA action is expected to be challenged in court, which will
require skilled and experienced attorneys specialized in the
Clean Air Act to devote significant resources to defense of
these action.''

     Which is it? Do you stand behind your recent statement to
Congress, meaning the budget justification is incorrect? Or do
you agree that you need to hire additional attorneys in part to
defend these unlawful rules in court?

    Response. The fiscal year President's budget requests 19.5
additional employees for legal counseling on a wide variety of
EPA issues and 20 employees specifically for Clean Power Plan
implementation. All of these additional employees would be
provided to the EPA's Office of General Counsel for use in both
EPA headquarters and the regional offices. Lawyers in the
Office of General Counsel work closely with EPA program offices
on rule development and implementation. They also review
permits, counsel on State implementation plans and help address
stakeholder concerns and questions. As such, with these
employees, the EPA would provide significant benefits to our
partners, stakeholders, and regulated communities.
    Assisting the Department of Justice in defending the
agency's actions is an important role for lawyers in the EPA's
Office of General Counsel. Our lawyers have deep expertise in
specific areas of law, and advise on all agency activities
within that area of expertise. Most of the EPA's significant
rules are challenged in court; often the regulated industry and
environmental plaintiffs both challenge the same rule. It is in
the interest of all stakeholders if the agency can get the rule
right the first time, providing a robust explanation and
record. This means a better final rule and less uncertainty.
    The additional Clean Power Plan focused legal employees
will work on the full range of important legal counseling
services provided by the Office of General Counsel, including
rule development, assisting the Department of Justice in
defense, reviewing permits, and counseling on State
implementation plans.

    Question 2. The Budget justification goes on to say that
additional legal resources will make EPA more responsive to
states, industry, and citizens, and will make EPA's actions
more defensible in court. Yet the budget request also says
there are no performance measures for the agency's attorneys
like there are for other programs.

     Why is that?
     Does this lack of staffing or accountability explain why,
when it issued performance standards for new sources in
September 2013, EPA seemed unaware of the Energy Power Act
provision that prohibits the use of carbon capture projects
receiving certain
     Federal funding from being used to show the technology
had been adequately demonstrated?
     Shouldn't EPA attorneys and staff in the Air office have
known about that provision before the rule was proposed?
     How are you going to ensure that these additional legal
resources will be used effectively?
     Would these be term-limited positions, or permanent
hires?
     Do the agency's attorneys--or any employees for that
matter--keep track of their time, like attorneys in the private
sector do or workers at a coal mine or factory would?
     Given the issues EPA has had with time and attendance
problems, what is EPA doing to ensure that EPA staff are in
fact doing the jobs they are being paid to do?

    Response. The Office of General Counsel supports each of
the agency's programs in achieving their goals and priorities.
As such, OGC supports the accomplishment of the performance
measures for every agency program. The additional legal
counseling FTE in the President's proposal would result in the
agency's ability to hire additional permanent attorneys in
fiscal year 2016. These new attorneys would allow the agency to
better serve our co-regulators and other stakeholders.
    While OGC itself does not have quantitative measures, it
has a very structured and systematic approach to its work. Each
law office has a weekly or bi-weekly meeting to report to the
General Counsel, and each office carefully tracks the cases and
associated deadlines in its area of law. Each law office is
similarly in close contact with the relevant media office,
getting real-time feedback on both that office's needs and OGC
lawyers' performance.
    The EPA's September 2013 Proposed Carbon Pollution Standard
for New Power Plant\1\] does not raise any accountability
concerns. Any final standards the EPA issues will be based on
sound science and will undergo thorough legal review to ensure
they comply with all applicable laws and regulations. The EPA
does not believe that the Energy Policy Act of 2005 precludes
consideration of the projects the EPA has evaluated. The EPA
has issued a Notice of Data Availability (NODA) that notes the
availability of a Technical Support Document (TSD) in the
rulemaking docket that details its proposed position on this
issue. It explains, ``EPA interprets these provisions to
preclude EPA from relying solely on the experience of
facilities that received EPAct05 assistance, but not to
preclude EPA from relying on the experience of such facilities
in conjunction with other information.'' The EPA based its
proposed determination on a number of projects and other
information including projects that did not receive any
assistance under EPAct05. In addition, the agency extended the
public comment period for January 2014 proposal by 60 days to
allow adequate time for the public to review and comment on the
contents of the NODA and TSD.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ For more information: http://www2.epa.gov/carbon-pollution-
standards/2013-proposed-carbon-pollution-standard-new-power-plants
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    OGC uses a tracking system primarily to assist with
workload management, to help ensure that all deadlines are met.
In addition to this close tracking of substantive work,
judicial deadlines, and client satisfaction, the time and
attendance of OGC employees are subject to all agency
accountability measures for time and attendance. Updated
agencywide internal controls were implemented on September 21,
2014 to ensure compliance with time and attendance policies and
regulations. The EPA made system adjustments to ensure accurate
time and attendance recording, including elimination of default
pay and mass approvals. The EPA established requirements for
supervisors to monitor time and attendance reports, and
clarified the time and attendance approvals of senior
executives through an executive approval framework.

    Question 3. Please describe the process and resources the
Agency (both Headquarters and Regional Offices) currently uses
to track litigation to which it is a party, as well as
deadlines for regulatory or other EPA action that have been
established in litigation settlements or court orders.

     What efforts are planned in fiscal year to improve this
process and the public transparency of this tracking?
     What public notice and opportunity for comment and public
participation does the Agency give to the public when a
deadline established in a settlement or court order is revised
or extended?

    Response. The process the agency uses to track litigation
starts with assigning the litigation to an attorney. The
attorney assigned along with counsel from the Department of
Justice, is responsible for tracking the litigation, and any
associated deadlines or court-ordered schedules. As major
deadlines or events approach, these are brought to the
attention of the General Counsel through weekly or bi-weekly
meetings. Where the agency agrees in settlement to a deadline
for agency action, that deadline becomes a commitment of the
relevant program office.
    For both litigation and regulatory actions, there are a
number of ways that agency provides information to the public.
Below are examples of how information regarding litigation and
regulatory actions are made available:

     Each Notice of Intent (NOI) to sue the EPA under an
environmental statute is posted here: http://epa.gov/ogc/
noi.html. (In response to stakeholder requests, the EPA has
also begun posting complaints next to the related NOI.)
     When the EPA receives a petition for rulemaking, those
are posted here: http://www2.epa.gov/aboutepa/petitions-
rulemaking.
     The EPA publishes in the Federal Register any proposed
settlement agreement under the Clean Air Act before finalizing.
There is a 30-day open comment period on each of these proposed
settlements. You can see an example here: https://
Federalregister.gov/a/01-21342.
     Regulatory agendas are available in a few different ways,
as explained on the agency's website. Available here: http://
www2.epa.gov/laws-regulations/regulatory-agendas-and-
regulatory-plans.
     The searchable regulatory plan is available at: http://
www.reginfo.gov/public/do/eAgendaSimpleSearch. (These entries
include deadlines such as those agreed to through settlement;
for an example search RIN 2060-AM08).

    Question 5. For its fiscal year budget proposal, EPA
requested to remove the 50 person ceiling for hiring under
Title 42. A March 5, 2015, EPA Inspector General Report found
that EPA's Office of Research and Development did not always
demonstrate the need to use Title 42 to recruit or retain 19
positions reviewed. In four cases reviewed, the IG found that
employees were converted to Title 42 to perform the same
position, yet paid a total $47,264 more in salary for
performing the same job. The EPA OIG recommended that EPA
improve transparency and its justification for the use of Title
42 appointments or reappointments, which could result in
potential monetary benefits of $3.5 million. EPA did not agree
with the OIG's recommendation. The OIG responded that EPA's
alternate approach does not address the need to justify the
need to use Title 42 authority or the need for more
transparency in the decisions to use the Title 42 authority.

     Why did EPA request to remove the 50 person ceiling under
Title 42 for fiscal year and not for fiscal year 6?
     Why did EPA disagree with the OIG's recommendations?
     How will the EPA address the need for greater
transparency and justification for Title 42 hiring?

    Response. As a result of congressional action in fiscal
year 5, the Administration chose to not request any additional
changes to its Title 42 authority in the fiscal year
President's Budget at this time. It should be noted that as
recently as 2014, the National Academy of Sciences strongly
supported EPA's use of the Title 42 authority. EPA's Office of
Research and Development (ORD) and the Office of Inspector
General (OIG) reached an agreement on the corrective actions to
be taken and EPA has completed these actions. The OIG has
officially closed this audit. The OIG report found that ORD has
a rigorous, in-depth process for hiring high-quality scientists
and science leaders under its Title 42 authority. The Report
found no instances of impropriety or mismanagement by EPA of
its Title 42 authority and acknowledged ORD had detailed
implementation guidance in place. The OIG also noted that EPA
has undergone other favorable evaluations, such as a 2012
Government Accountability Office audit of EPA's Title 42
authority.
    Further, the OIG report highlighted ORD's statements that
Title 42 ``allows the agency to maintain workforce flexibility
and critical expertise in the face of emerging and rapidly
changing scientific and technological approaches. The science
leaders that ORD has recruited and retained using Title 42 are
world-renowned experts in their field and are leading cutting-
edge research programs in ORD to address the environmental
issues of the 21st Century.'' ORD agreed to address the one OIG
procedural recommendation contained in the report, which
focused solely on perceptions of transparency.
    To address the one OIG report recommendation, ORD revised
its Title 42 Operations Manual to increase the transparency of
ORD's justification to use Title 42 authority. The ORD Title 42
Operations Manual has been updated to reflect ORD's periodic
reporting and use of Title 42 recruitment request memorandum.
The OIG has now closed this audit.


                           homeland security


    Question 1. Administrator McCarthy, President Obama
recently said that terrorism is less of a threat to the
American people than climate change. Do you agree?
    Response. Climate change and acts of terrorism are both
issues of serious concern to the EPA. The EPA's homeland
security budget helps the EPA to address important requirements
that are intended to prepare the EPA to respond to and promote
recovery from significant emergencies, including acts of
terrorism and natural disasters.

    Question 2. Does the President's thinking explain why EPA's
budget request has cut homeland security related funding in
several important areas?
    For example, the budget would cut more than $1 million from
the Science and Technology account for work to treat
contamination from chemical and radiological incidents (Page
131). The budget would also cut more than $2.5 million from the
Superfund account reducing EPA's ability to detect threats and
test and decontaminate sites.
     Why is EPA cutting back its capability to detect and
respond to biological or radiological attacks?
    Response. The EPA is maintaining its capability to detect
and respond to biological or radiological attacks. Over the
past years, the EPA has built, developed, and now maintains
agency Homeland Security assets that provide critical technical
expertise and support during nationally significant incidents
including those which can involve chemical, biological,
radiological, and nuclear (CBRN) agents. EPA also continues to
provide support in addressing the science and technology needs
for response to and recovery from biological and radiological
incidents.
    The reductions to the Solid Waste & Emergency Response
program will not impact the agency's ability to respond to
incidents. The reductions may affect field equipment
maintenance and upgrades, such as planned upgrades to the
Portable High-Throughput Integrated Laboratory Identification
System (PHILIS) units. Additionally, there may be reduced
agency participation in large-scale exercises that support
internal and external coordination on Federal roles and
responsibilities. The EPA will continue its coordination and
integration efforts and its increased leverage of resources
with our Federal partners to enable the EPA to meet its
baseline requirements on Homeland Security Presidential
Directives and Homeland Security mandates by following an all-
hazards approach with emphasis on the most pressing capability
gaps.
    The fiscal year EPA's President's Budget request of $21.1
million for the Homeland Security Research Program (HSRP) will
allow the agency to continue to conduct research that supports
the agency in characterization of biological and radiological
contamination and decontamination of indoor and outdoor areas
as well as the management of the resulting waste during
response to these incidents.
    In addition, the President's fiscal year Budget requests
increased funding for some of the needed operability upgrades
to our radiation air monitoring system, RadNet.

    Question 3. The budget for emergency preparedness is
essentially stagnant (only a slight $200,000 increase due to
higher fixed cost for rent and staff salaries).
     What does this mean in practice--fewer air monitoring
flights, slower response times, increased risks to human health
and the environment from a terrorist event?

    Response. The EPA will continue its role in protecting
human health and the environment from risks posed by a
potential terrorist event, and the fiscal year President's
budget proposal would not impact the agency's ability to
respond to a terrorist event. The proposed budget for the
Superfund Emergency Preparedness program adjusts resources for
the National Response Team (NRT). The EPA will continue to
maintain its significant role in the NRT, but will reduce
contractor support for NRT committees and subcommittees.

    Question 4. Recent scandals suggest that EPA has a
``culture of complacency'' among some supervisors and managers
when it comes to time and attendance problems, computer usage,
and property management.
     Given these concerns--and ongoing work by the Office of
Inspector General--I am troubled to see the low priority that
EPA places on screening job applicants and making sure its
employees have been vetted and are suitable for their positions
of trust.
     For example, the homeland security budget for conducting
background checks for employees and contractors would be cut by
$340,000--even though the John Beale episode has highlighted
the need for improved background checks. Do you think this is
the time for EPA to be cutting back on its process for doing
background checks?

    Response. The EPA continues to perform background
investigations in accordance with the Office of Personnel and
Management (OPM) guidelines. There are no planned resource cuts
to background investigations for fiscal year 6. The reduction
cited in the question reflects savings associated with other
work in the Homeland Security: Protection of EPA Personnel and
Infrastructure program. More specifically, the reduction
reflects savings associated with transitioning the EPA
Personnel Access and Security System (EPASS) from development
into a State of operation and maintenance. EPASS manages the
enrollment, printing, issuance, and lifecycle of Personal
Identity Verification (PIV) credentials as required by Homeland
Security Presidential Directive 12 (HSPD-12).

    Question 5. The IG has also raised concerns about the
Office of Homeland Security and its interference with the IG's
law enforcement work.
     How will this be resolved so it does not become a
distraction to the Agency and impede EPA's homeland security
mission?

    Response. Over the past few months, the Office of Homeland
Security (OHS) has worked collaboratively with the Office of
Inspector General (OIG) to ensure that EPA's homeland security
mission is strengthened through timely information sharing and
threat management. OHS also has established a process for
providing the OIG with access to any external law enforcement
entity that requests assistance from OHS for EPA related
counterintelligence or counter terrorism investigative
activities. This process ensures that there continues to be no
impediment to the OIG's ability to pursue any law enforcement
actions or activities that fall within their jurisdiction.


                              gao reports


    Question 1. The Government Accountability Office issued a
report last year on problems with how EPA analyzes its
regulations for economic impact, less burdensome alternatives,
and uncertainties. GAO found that EPA's regulatory impact
analysis (RIAs) do not clearly identify the costs of EPA's
rules and the data EPA used in its analyses were often out of
date and irrelevant.
    For example, GAO found that for several high-profile clean
air and water rules, EPA relied on employment data that was
between 20 and 30 years old and from only four industrial
sectors. The GAO report states, ``Without additional
information and improvements in its approach for estimating
employment effects, EPA's RIAs may be limited in their
usefulness for helping decisionmakers and the public understand
the potential effects of the agency's regulations on
employment.''
    That's a big problem--that EPA is making these incredibly
significant regulatory decisions--and the American public,
Congress, and even EPA itself do not know what the economic
impacts or potential job losses will be.

     Is EPA continuing to rely on the outdated and limited
employment data when analyzing the potential job impacts of its
rules? If not, what is EPA relying on?
     How much of EPA's budget request will be going toward
improving and updating the employment data that EPA uses in its
economic analysis documents?

    Response. The EPA no longer uses the data and study
critically reviewed by GAO. Given the dearth of studies and
models, the EPA does not use the same approach for employment
analysis for every rule. As with other analyses in our RIAs,
each employment analysis is tailored to the specifics of that
regulation and reflects the degree to which reliable tools and
data are available to quantify impacts. When conducting such
analysis the EPA uses the best tools and data available for the
relevant rulemaking. Often times, EPA conducts original
``bottom up'' studies that examine the employment used in
specific industries and in the manufacturing and operation of
pollution abatement equipment. In some cases, the EPA focuses
on a qualitative discussion of the employment impacts both
positive and negative and in other cases, it quantifies
selected employment impacts. As the GAO acknowledges, the
agency strives in all instances to transparently describe the
strengths and weaknesses of the approach chosen by the agency.
The EPA believes that these analyses, whether qualitative or
quantitative, provide decisionmakers and the public with
valuable information on the employment impacts of its rules and
has worked hard to refine these analyses over time.
    GAO's discussion of employment impact analysis focuses on
one particular study that the EPA used to quantify employment
effects in two of the seven rules reviewed by the GAO. It is
important to recognize that this published study represented
the best available peer-reviewed research at the time these
RIA's were conducted and that GAO reported that the EPA's
treatment transparently recognized the limitations of the study
where it was applied. The EPA recognizes that there are limited
tools provided in the peer-reviewed economics literature to
quantify the small shifts in employment that might be
attributable to environmental regulation and is continually
working to improve our approaches.
    It is difficult to assess how much of the budget request
the EPA will be using to improve and update the employment data
in our economic analysis documents. Partly this is because
economists throughout the agency conduct employment analyses
and use the best data available for their particular rules. In
addition, analysis of employment impacts is one part of a
broader analytic effort conducted for agency rules, so it is
hard to isolate the costs of one aspect of the regulatory
analyses.
    The EPA is exploring alternative approaches in the relevant
theoretical and empirical economics literature to apply new
modeling approaches to quantify employment impacts. In October
2012, the agency convened a scientific workshop with academic
economists to examine the theory and methods for understanding
employment effects of environmental regulation. The EPA is in
the process of updating its Guidelines for Preparing Economic
Analyses to include revised guidance on assessing employment
impacts from regulation. Finally, the EPA has announced the
formation of a new Science Advisory Board panel to advise the
agency on how best to model the economic impacts of
environmental regulation, including approaches to capture
employment effects. This panel plans to convene this summer.
Commenters also are invited to provide information and data
relevant to employment analysis during the notice and comment
periods on rulemakings.

    Question 2. The GAO report also found that EPA had cut
corners in its economic analysis due to the short timeframes it
had for issuing rules pursuant to court-ordered deadlines and
litigation settlements.

     What criteria does EPA use when agreeing to a rulemaking
deadline in a litigation settlement?
     How does EPA's obligation to conduct a robust analysis of
a rule's economic impact factor into these court-ordered
deadlines, or does it get short shrift in the discussions?
     Is part of the problem that laws like the Clean Air Act
have unreasonable deadlines?
     Would you support attempts to give EPA additional time
under the law to issue rules or update standards every 5 or 8
years as currently may be the case?

    Response. Generally, EPA and the Department of Justice
(DOJ) seek to settle cases brought against EPA if we believe
the litigation risk is high and there is a resolution
consistent with EPA authorities and in the public interest. The
factors considered in determining whether to settle a
particular matter include: the legal risks presented by the
case, including both the probability and possible consequences
of an adverse decision; and the comparative public policy
implications of litigation versus settlement, including the
resources required to litigate versus to take those actions
called for by a settlement. These factors are applied in an
evenhanded manner, without regard to the identity or type of
the plaintiff or petitioner in the case.
    The environmental statutes as enacted by Congress provide a
myriad of regulatory actions that the EPA must take by certain
deadlines. These requirements are commonly referred to as
``mandatory duties'' and the cases brought against the EPA
alleging the Agency has failed to fulfill such duties are
commonly referred to as ``mandatory duty suits.'' Where the
``mandatory duty'' allegations are strongly grounded in
statutory text, the EPA's litigating position is generally
weaker, which impacts how the agency evaluates its settlement
options.
    While the decision to seek settlement is generally made
jointly, DOJ typically takes the lead for the United States
government in the development of a settlement strategy and in
negotiating the settlement terms, and for EPA settlements,
DOJ's Environment and Natural Resources Division must approve
the decision to enter into a settlement agreement or consent
decree.
    In taking any action, the EPA is guided by applicable legal
standards and requirements, as well as the relevant science and
analysis. In mandatory duty lawsuits, seeking settlement allows
the agency to negotiate for more time than it would expect to
receive through litigation. Litigating these cases can be
expensive litigation and result in a court-ordered schedule
requiring agency action on an unfeasible timeline. By
negotiating for an achievable deadline, the agency is able to
invest more time in the analysis and decisionmaking process.
    The majority of environmental lawsuits against the EPA are
brought under the Clean Air Act. The Clean Air Act does have
many mandatory duties with associated deadlines, which are the
source of many of the cases we settle. However, before settling
these cases, the proposed settlement agreement containing any
deadlines goes out for public comment. Under Clean Air Act
section 113(g), before finalizing a settlement agreement under
the Clean Air Act or asking a court to enter a Clean Air Act
consent decree, the EPA publishes in the Federal Register a
notice seeking public comment on the proposed agreement and
then considers any comments received.
    The EPA has many duties and authorities under the various
environmental statutes it administers. The agency works to
protect human health and the environment by focusing on
critical priorities while also endeavoring to meet recurring
statutory obligations.


                               facilities


    Question  Administrator McCarthy, EPA's budget
justification says EPA is continuing to recalculate its
facility and rent needs. It says that EPA plans to spend $1
million from the Science and Technology account to study
further consolidation (Page 140) and that EPA intends to save
$9.5 million from the EPM account from these efforts (Page
427).

     What plans if any does EPA have to close or relocate
program, regional or lab offices or spaces across the country
in fiscal year 6? When will affected offices be informed of
their closure? Will the affected employees be given the
opportunity to relocate or transfer to another duty station?
     How much has EPA spent in fiscal year and 2015 to
relocate employees? How much does it expect to spend on
relocation expenses in fiscal year 6?

    Response. In EPA's fiscal year budget request, the agency
requested $10 million to consolidate the Willamette Research
Station and the Region 8 laboratory. Employees at the
Willamette Research Station and the Region 8 laboratory have
been informed of the agency's fiscal year request to
consolidate their space. Neither consolidation requires
employee relocation. The work being conducted at the Willamette
Research Station will be moved to the Western Ecology
Division's main facility in Corvallis. Employees from the
Region 8 laboratory in Golden, CO will be moved to EPA's
National Enforcement Investigations Center laboratory in nearby
Lakewood, CO. In fiscal year and fiscal year consolidation
activities were limited to office moves within local commuting
areas and employee relocation was not required. In fiscal year
4, EPA spent $5.4 million to move the offices of approximately
500 employees from 1310 L Street to the agency's Federal
Triangle Campus in Washington, DC. In fiscal year 5, the agency
spent $196.4 thousand in employee relocation expenses
associated with facility consolidation. The agency does not
anticipate using additional resources for the remainder of
fiscal year to move employees into new facilities.


                       superfund/hazardous waste


    Question 1. The fiscal year budget shifts EPA's emphasis
from well-established programs approved by Congress to ones
that advance the President's Climate Action Plan.

     For example, the budget would cut almost $1 million and 5
FTEs from its RCRA corrective action program, which will reduce
``EPA's technical support to State partners and may reduce the
pace of cleanups including site-wide 'RCRA remedy construction'
determinations.'' How will this reduction impact EPA's
implementation of recommendations in the Government
Accountability Office's 2011 report concerning RCRA corrective
actions?
     How will EPA prioritize its work and support to states in
response to the proposed reductions in funding?
     Will any sites or states that would have received support
in order for EPA to meet its corrective action goals in the
fiscal year 4-2018 Strategic Plan, no longer receive support
due to the proposed reductions in funding?
     In another example, the fiscal year budget request would
cut funding for the RCRA waste management program by $1.3
million and more than 9 FTEs, which according to EPA's budget
justification ``may delay activities such as conducting
additional analysis to support non-hazardous secondary
materials categorical rulemakings and responding to regulatory
backlog petitions.'' Please identify how many ``regulatory
backlog petitions'' EPA had at the start of fiscal year and the
backlog time for each petition.
     How will this proposed reduction impact EPA's
implementation of the final Hazardous and Solid Waste
Management System; Disposal of Coal Combustion Residuals from
Electric Utilities rule, signed by EPA on December 19, 2014?

    Question 2. Notably, the fiscal year budget proposed a $2.3
million increase, including an additional 4.2 FTEs, for the
Sustainable Materials Management program to implement key
aspects of the President's Climate Action Plan.

     The budget justification states EPA will explore the
application of Sustainable Materials Management ``approach to
other high priority areas.'' What are these areas?
     The budget justification also states that EPA plans to
hire 5 FTEs to serve as ``Community Resource Coordinators for
climate adaptation, sustainability, and communities work'' who
will ``work as a cross-agency, multi-media team to facilitate
access to EPA's programs and resources.'' Please explain
whether these would be permanent or term-limited positions, the
professional qualifications for these positions, and from what
Headquarters or regional office such positions would be based.
     The budget request proposes the creation of a $1.3
million grant program ``to support the EPA's investment in
climate mitigation through waste program activities to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions.'' Please describe the statutory
authority for this program, the anticipated number of grants
that would be funded in fiscal year 6, and a summary of the
criteria EPA would use for grant awards.

    Question 3. Concerns remain about the slow pace of
Superfund cleanups. In fiscal year 4, EPA achieved construction
completions at only 8 Superfund sites, an all-time low, with an
enacted budget for Superfund cleanups at $555 million. In
fiscal year 6, EPA is proposing to achieve construction
completions at 13 sites with a budget request of $539 million.
How many additional Superfund sites would EPA be able to clean
up if the $214 million that the President has requested for
greenhouse gas rules were put toward the Superfund program
instead?
    Responses. As GAO recommended, the EPA is assessing the
remaining corrective action workload, evaluating the resource
needs to meet these goals, and considering revising the goals.
This reduction in corrective action resources will not delay
the continued assessment of remaining workload and predictions
for future progress. The reduction may, in the short-term, have
an impact on EPA's ability to meet our site-wide remedy
construction fiscal year and fiscal year targets.

     The EPA will continue to work closely with states to
prioritize technical assistance and work sharing for facilities
or work areas where there is the greatest need, and will
continue to share program efficiencies to facilitate cleanup at
corrective action facilities and polychorinated biphenyls (PCB)
sites.
     The fiscal year President's Budget requested funding
equal to the fiscal year enacted level for the Hazardous Waste
Financial Assistance program which provides resources to our
State partners to fulfill their RCRA obligations which includes
corrective action activities. The proposed reductions to the
RCRA Corrective Action program will not eliminate support to
any specific State or facility, but will be distributed
nationwide. The funding level allows for continued, although
not fully maximized, progress on cleanups.
     Since 1998, the EPA has received 15 RCRA formal
rulemaking petitions and EPA has responded completely to three
of these (Coal Combustion Residuals, Saccharin, and
Gasification). At the start of fiscal year 5, the EPA has 12
``regulatory backlog petitions.'' Of these 12 petitions, three
are actively being addressed (two for Non-Hazardous Secondary
Materials and one for Corrosivity); the others are under
review. In addition, EPA receives approximately 30--40
``informal'' requests for regulatory interpretations or
assistance with specific emerging waste management situations
over the course of a given year. These requests come from the
regulated community, from states, citizens, and from foreign
governments. Often these are complex, requiring the agency to
obtain additional information about specific situations or
industrial processes before being able to respond.
     The proposed reduction will not impact implementation of
the final Coal Combustion Residuals Rule.
    Within and outside of the Federal Government, the EPA has
been working to reduce food loss and food waste through
Sustainable Materials Management (SMM) approaches such as
smarter purchasing and food donation. In addition, the
residential and commercial building sector stands as an area
where SMM principles can make a substantial impact with smart
design choices, safer materials choices, and reuse and
recycling of materials. Over the next several decades, billions
of tons of concrete, steel, and wallboard will be required to
construct, maintain, and operate our nation's buildings, roads
and other infrastructure, resulting in substantial
environmental impacts, including energy and petroleum
consumption, use of non-renewable mineral resources, greenhouse
gas emissions, expenditure of fresh water, and land and habitat
use.
     The Community Resource Coordinator positions are intended
to be permanent employees in the Regions. Each Region will
receive 0.5 full-time equivalent employee dedicated to working
as cross-agency, multi-media team members. The precise
professional qualifications for the positions have not been
finalized at this time. However, coordinators will be expected
to have knowledge of and a firm grasp on sustainability
concepts such as SMM, green infrastructure, smart growth, and
brownfields. Further qualifications will include demonstrated
experience regarding community support entities and mechanisms
(i.e., the EPA's programs and other programs across the Federal
spectrum that impact environmental outcomes).
     The statutory authority for the proposed $1.3 million
grant program is the Solid Waste Disposal Act Sec. 8001--
Research, Demonstrations, Training, and Other Activities. The
EPA estimates that approximately 8-13 grants would be funded in
fiscal year 6. These funds will focus on: increasing the
recycling rates for containers and packaging; enhancing and
expanding results-driven programs; working with the public and/
or private sector to provide funding to assist states and local
governments and non-governmental organizations (NGO's) focused
on infrastructure development and providing technical
assistance to recycling programs. Support in this program area
will help to create new businesses and jobs in a sector that
employs 1.1 million people at approximately 56,000
establishments, generating an annual payroll of nearly $37
billion, and more than $236 billion in annual revenues.
Criteria for the grant awards would potentially include support
of agency recycling goals, community/stakeholder needs,
feasibility of project success, project benefits (e.g.,
policies, tools, job creation, economic and social benefits,
among others), and the ability to leverage existing initiatives
and partners. The EPA also will work with additional
stakeholders to ensure consistent recycling guidance, identify
gaps and recycling barriers, and transfer best practices. The
reporting period for grants is anticipated to extend beyond 1
year, in order to measure changing recycling rates.

    The Superfund Remedial program has made substantial
progress in completing response work, as measured by the site-
wide ``construction completion'' measure, though this is only
one of a suite of measures used to gauge Superfund outcomes. As
of the end of fiscal year 4, EPA had achieved construction
completions at over 68 percent of the 1,706 Superfund sites on
the National Priority List (NPL).
    As part of the fiscal year budget request, the President
has requested an increase in the Superfund Remedial program
budget of more than $38 million and an increase in the
Superfund Removal budget of more than $9 million. The EPA
anticipates the increase in Remedial funding will enable the
agency to start remedial action at up to 10 additional EPA
funded site projects. It is difficult to assess how many
Superfund sites could be completed with as much as $214 million
in additional funding. Partly, this is because each site is
different with unique site characteristics, so that site-by-
site, cleanup costs would be expected to be very different.
Some sites cost in the tens to hundreds of millions of dollars
to complete. In addition, to move a site to completion, site
investigation and studies, and remedy selection and design must
be completed before starting and completing cleanup
construction.


                                keystone


    Question 1. Administrator McCarthy, in January of this year
you stated that EPA believes current low oil prices are a
short-term situation and will not affect how your Agency crafts
new regulations.

     Do you still stand by that statement?
     Can you please explain to me why 3 weeks later EPA told
the State Department that it should revisit its analysis of the
Keystone XL pipeline with a new assumption that the current low
oil prices are permanent?
     As a general rule, you ignore short-term oil prices when
evaluating costs and benefits. But, politics appear to
determine when you make an exception to that rule. How can you
reconcile this inconsistency?

    Question 12. The statement regarding current oil prices was
a comment on consumer automobile buying habits, and was not
intended to represent the agency's regulatory development
process. Administrator McCarthy also noted that she did not
expect that oil prices would continue to have ``extreme
fluctuation[s].''
    The EPA's comment letter to the Department of State did not
suggest an assumption that current low oil prices would be
permanent. Instead, the EPA noted that given the importance of
oil prices to the Department of State's market analysis and
conclusions, and the recent large declines in oil prices and
the uncertainty of oil price projections, we recommend that the
additional low price scenario included in the Final EIS be
given additional weight in considering potential environmental
impacts of the project.
    The EPA considers all relevant information when evaluating
costs and benefits of its proposed regulations. With regard to
our comments to the Department of State concerning the Keystone
XL pipeline, the Department of State's Final Supplemental EIS
identified the price of oil as a key and critical determinant
of the effect of the pipeline on Canadian oil sand development
and thus the environmental impacts of the project. The EPA's
comments only recommended that they more fully consider the low
oil price scenario when evaluating the environmental impacts of
the project.


                                methane


    Question 1. Administrator McCarthy, the Administration has
acknowledged the great benefits that we are now enjoying as a
result of the natural-gas renaissance in the US. In fact, the
US is now the world's largest gas producer. As this was
occurring, our nation's producers have been making great
strides in reducing methane emissions thanks to investments in
technology allowing us to produce more natural gas in a cleaner
way. In fact, today, while natural gas production has increased
37 percent since 1990, methane from production has gone down by
25 percent. I am concerned as such by your January announcement
regarding methane regulation.

     Why are you targeting such a steep 45 percent reduction
in emissions from an industry that has already reduced its
emissions significantly while increasing production? Moreover,
the production sector represents only 0.4--1.4 percent of U.S.
GHG emissions.

    Question 2. In the Administration's January 14th release to
reduce methane emissions from this industry, an assumption was
given projecting that industry's methane emissions will be
increasing by 25 percent--not decreasing as already shown.

    Question 1. Can you explain this assumption and provide the
specific data from which you've based these projections?

    Question 3. Administrator McCarthy, I'm trying to
understand EPA's rationale for pursuing another round of Clean
Air Act regulations on natural gas production. This time the
agency is directly targeting methane. I think it's important to
note the industry's progress in reducing methane. Natural gas
producers have reduced methane emissions by 25 percent since
1990, even as production has grown 37 percent.
    A recent report by researchers at the University of Texas
and the Environmental Defense Fund (EDF) found that methane
emissions from the upstream portion of the supply chain are
only 0.38 percent of production. That's about 10 percent lower
than what the same research team found in a study released in
September 2013. Studies by the National Renewable Energy
Laboratory, U.N. IPCC, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
and many others reached similar conclusion: that methane
emissions from natural gas production are declining, and quite
low compared to other sources.
    Moreover, we can't forget that methane is the main
component of natural gas. Producers have every incentive to
capture it and prevent leaks. The evidence I just cited shows
this is exactly what they are doing.
    The industry is only now implementing new source
performance and MACT standards finalized in 2012, which target
VOCs and sulfur dioxide, but also will help reduce methane. So
Administrator, my question is: Why is EPA pursuing another
round of mandates on the industry? What is the rationale for
moving down this path?

    Question 4. Administrator, EPA indicated it will develop
new source performance standards for new and modified natural
gas wells this summer. This action will be taken pursuant to
Section 111(b) of the Clean Air Act, which covers new and
modified sources. Some legal commentators believe that this
action will provide the basis for regulations of existing wells
under Section 111(d). What is EPA's legal view on this point?
Once you finalize regulations under 111(b), are regulations for
existing wells inevitable under 111(d)? Is EPA planning or
thinking about regulation existing wells under 111(d)?
    Response. Methane, the key constituent of natural gas, is a
potent greenhouse gas with a global warming potential more than
25 times greater than that of carbon dioxide. Nearly 30 percent
of methane emissions in the U.S. in 2012 came from oil
production and the production, processing, transmission and
distribution of natural gas. While methane emissions from the
oil and gas industry have declined by more than 10 percent
since 1990, they are projected to increase significantly over
the next decade if additional steps are not taken to reduce
emissions from this rapidly growing industry. EPA's strategy,
which will use both voluntary and regulatory approaches, will
help avoid this anticipated increase in methane emissions from
new sources.
    The January 14, 2015 announcement marked the beginning of
the agency's process to develop proposed standards for methane
and VOC emissions for new and modified sources in the oil and
gas sector. As is the case with all of our regulatory actions,
EPA will develop a robust regulatory impact analysis that will
include, among other issues, a rigorous analysis of projected
future emissions from this sector that would be avoided by the
implementation of the proposed standards. To ensure the
agency's projections are based on the very best data available,
EPA's analysis will take into account additional information
from industry, states, and other stakeholders and will follow
the time-tested methodologies used in all of our regulatory
impact analyses. The agency's analysis will be issued along
with a proposal this summer and will be available for public
review and comment.
    Methane emissions accounted for nearly 10 percent of U.S.
greenhouse gas emissions in 2012, of which nearly 30 percent
came from the production transmission and distribution of oil
and natural gas. Emissions from the oil and gas sector are down
16 percent since 1990 and current data show significant
reductions from certain parts of the sector, notably well
completions. Nevertheless, emissions from the oil and gas
sector are projected to rise more than 25 percent by 2025
without additional steps to lower them. For these reasons, a
strategy for cutting methane emissions from the oil and gas
sector is an important component of efforts to address climate
change.
    The steps announced are also a sound economic and public
health strategy because reducing methane emissions means
capturing valuable fuel that is otherwise wasted and reducing
other harmful pollutants--a win for public health and the
economy. Achieving the Administration's goal would save up to
180 billion cubic feet of natural gas in 2025, enough to heat
more than 2 million homes for a year and continue to support
businesses that manufacture and sell cost-effective
technologies to identify, quantify, and reduce methane
emissions.
    On January 14, 2015, the EPA announced plans to set
standards under 111(b) to address methane and VOC emissions
from new and modified sources, develop new guidelines to assist
states in reducing ozone-forming pollutants from existing oil
and gas systems in areas that do not meet the ozone health
standard and in states in the Ozone Transport Region, and work
collaboratively with key stakeholders to make progress on
voluntary efforts to reduce emissions from existing sources.


                        environmental education


    Question  For its fiscal year budget proposal, EPA
requested zero funds for its environmental education program;
yet its fiscal year budget proposal requests funds albeit an
increase in funds from $8.7 million enacted in fiscal year to
$10.969 million.

     Why did EPA, after requesting zero funds for the program
over the last couple years, request funds and an increase in
funding for the program?
     EPA has recently identified climate change as a priority
for environmental education grants under this program. These
grants are used to educate elementary and secondary school
students, train teachers, purchase textbooks, and develop
curricula based on environmental issues EPA identifies as a
priority. What performance measures are in place to ensure such
curricula is based on the best available science?
    Response. The recent establishment of the Office of Public
Engagement and Environmental Education (OPEEE) with a career
deputy to lead OEE is designed to provide leadership,
management stability, and forward-thinking strategy to
establish and implement a consistent vision for environmental
education (EE) across the agency. Ensuring a centralized
approach to EE and partnering the public engagement and EE
functions within OA is intended to help EPA:

     place greater emphasis on EE as a tool for advancing
priorities by providing leadership, technical expertise and
coordination of agency efforts;
     enable EE to be more effectively and consistently used by
the EPA's programs; and
     broaden the reach and scope of EE (through greater public
engagement).

    Reinstating the EE program project in fiscal year is a
visible commitment to enhancing the agency's leadership role in
educating and informing the public and encouraging
environmentally beneficial attitudes and actions. A centralized
EE program will allow the EPA to:

     improve internal EE capacity within program offices
through greater provision of OEE expertise;
     support the National Environmental Education Foundation
(NEEF) and other stakeholders to leverage their resources for
greater stakeholder reach; and
     avoid significant administrative complexities associated
with awarding grants under multiple authorities (under a
decentralized approach) and ensure grants monitoring and
compliance

    This program has requested in fiscal year an increase to
help meet the required staffing levels and corresponding
funding requirements under the National Environmental Education
Act. The request also reflects increased support for
administration of EE grants; advancement of the frameworks and
tools used for measuring EE impacts; development of a process
to identify and address gaps and redundancies in EE materials
and programming within the agency; leveraging of EE efforts
across the Federal Government; and development of the longer-
term strategic direction for the program.
    In order to be eligible for a grant under the EPA's
Environmental Education (EE) Grant program, proposals must
address at least one of the EPA's environmental themes and at
least one EPA educational priority. The EE Grant Program does
not assign order of importance or preference to those themes.
According to the National Environmental Education Act (NEEA),
grant funds can be used to support development and
dissemination of curricula, educational materials, and training
programs for teachers, plus the education of elementary and
secondary students and other interested groups, including
senior Americans in both formal and non-formal educational
settings.
    The annual grants are awarded through a competitive
process, and applicable Federal guidelines and policies are
followed for grant solicitations, proposal evaluation, and
grant awards. The solicitations for EE grants includes a
requirement that grantees collect and report applicable data as
a condition to accepting a grant. Grantees are also required to
submit a logic model with their initial proposal to identify
short-, medium-and long-term educational and environmental
outputs and outcomes of the project(s). As a further condition
of eligibility, grantees must describe how they will evaluate
the success in achieving the proposed project results and must
submit a completed evaluation on the project's performance at
the end of the project. In the application as well as in their
progress reports, they must demonstrate the educational
component of their program, including the best available
science upon which it is based. By law, post-award baseline
monitoring must be conducted on every EE grant, and at least
every 6 months all grantees are required to report on the
progress, accomplishments, and funding associated with the
project.


             uranium and thorium mill tailings--rulemaking


    Question 1. In January, the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency proposed ``Health and Environmental Standards for
Uranium and Thorium Mill Tailings (80 Fed. Reg. 4156). The
agency maintains the rulemaking is necessary to reduce the risk
of undetected excursions of pollutants from in situ uranium
recovery operations into adjacent aquifers.

     Does the agency have any evidence that these operations
have adversely impacted an adjacent aquifer? If so, please
provide such data.
     Please explain why no such data is included in the
rulemaking docket.
     If EPA has no such data, please explain the basis for
proceeding with this rulemaking.

    Response. The EPA, as well as the general public, have
access to NRC data on ISR facilities. More information
concerning in-situ recovery (ISR) wellfield baseline and
restoration groundwater quality data collected from the NRC
licensed ISR sites for regulatory purposes can be found at
http://www.nrc.gov/info-finder/materials/uranium/. Generally
the data is current through 2013 and shows both excursions and
in at least one case, stability monitoring for as long as 10
years.
    The current requirements at 40 CFR Part 192 address
conventional uranium facilities but do not specifically address
ISR operations. ISR operations are now the most common method
for extracting uranium. In order to understand some of the
reasons the EPA proposed the rule, it is helpful to understand
the history related to ISR licensing and regulation. In 2006,
after years of implementing the general requirements in 40 CFR
Part 192 at ISR facilities, NRC said that the ``manner of
regulation [of ISR facilities] is both complex and
unmanageable'' and has led to an ``inconsistent and ineffective
regulatory program [for these types of facilities].'' In 2007,
NRC began developing new rules to address the issues at ISR
facilities but stopped because the Atomic Energy Act (AEA), as
amended by the Uranium Mill Tailings Radiation Control Act
(UMTRCA), requires that the EPA promulgate generally applicable
standards, which are then implemented and enforced by NRC.
    In past and present efforts to implement the general
requirements in 40 CFR Part 192 at ISR facilities, requirements
vary from site to site rather than following a consistent,
national approach for all ISR facilities. The proposal presents
health or environmental standards tailored specifically to
address the technologies and challenges associated with the
most widely used method of uranium recovery.
    The proposed standards will regulate byproduct materials
produced by uranium ISR, with a primary focus on groundwater
protection, restoration and stability. The proposed rule will
reduce the risk of undetected excursions of pollutants into
adjacent aquifers. This in turn will reduce the human health
risks that could result from exposures to radionuclides in well
water used for drinking or agriculture in areas located down-
gradient from an ISR In addition to avoiding human health
impacts, the proposed rule has the potential to detect
excursions sooner and thus enable a faster remedial response.
Because plumes detected during long-term stability monitoring
would be smaller, costs of remediation would be potentially
much lower. The proposal would also lessen the likelihood of
undocumented contamination of aquifers resulting in costly
cleanup, potentially funded by the U.S. Government rather than
the responsible party (e.g. the ISR facility). Citizens located
near these ISR operations have commented that they are
concerned about these facilities and have requested that EPA
finalize this proposal. The intent of the Part 192 proposal is
to establish requirements that will ensure the ISR facility
that disturbs the groundwater must restore that groundwater to
predetermined levels and ensure that the restoration is stable
before leaving the site and terminating its NRC license.

    Question 2. In the cost benefit analysis accompanying the
rulemaking, the agency focuses almost exclusively on the
increased costs that would be imposed by the proposed rule's
new monitoring requirements, which could require facilities to
conduct more than 30 additional years of groundwater
monitoring. EPA fails to assess multiple other costs that would
be associated with the rule, including the costs of maintaining
licenses, permits, etc. for 30 years; claims maintenance fees
owed to the Bureau of Land Management for facilities on public
lands; costs to obtain and maintain surety for additional
years; costs related to continuing leases with private surface
holders; taxes; insurance; or the cost of maintaining equipment
and facilities. Given the additional costs that would be
imposed, it is likely that the ultimate cost would be several
orders of magnitude higher than EPA calculated in their cost
benefit analysis.

     Please explain why EPA chose to ignore these costs in its
analysis.
     Does EPA plan to revise its cost benefit analysis to more
comprehensively assess the costs of the rulemaking? If not, why
not?

    Response. License fees range from $35,400 to $40,000 per
year, but drop to zero if only decommissioning is occurring.
Financial assurance costs continue through decommissioning, but
decline as more of the site is decommissioned. Throughout the
life of an ISR operation, the costs associated with licensing
and financial assurance would, in EPA's assessment, be
unaffected by the proposed rule, until only one wellfield is
still in operation or undergoing decommissioning. The longer
duration of monitoring required would cause the firms to incur
the costs associated with financial assurance for a longer
period of time (potentially 30 years). However, as the number
of wellfields in operation declines, and the amount of
radioactive material onsite declines, the magnitude of the
financial assurance required would decline proportionally. EPA
thus believes that the additional costs associated with payment
of license fees and financial assurance would be small relative
to other incremental costs and thus we did not include them in
our quantitative estimate of costs and impacts.

          Responses by Gina McCarthy to Additional Questions
                          from Senator Wicker


                             carbon dioxide


    Question 1. As I hope you know, a one-sided focus on worst-
case stories and scenarios is a poor foundation for sound
environmental and economic policies. There is an extraordinary
amount of uncertainty in climate science mainly because of the
complex nature of the climate and climate models. Climate model
predictions have wildly varying degrees of accuracy and many
have estimates that failed to come to fruition. With so much
uncertainty and unknown variables regarding the impacts of
carbon dioxide on the world's oceans and environment how can
you possibly accurately estimate the costs and benefits of your
proposals? Considering you can't provide a quantifiable,
measurable direct impact of these regulations on sea level rise
and global temperatures, don't you think the other supposed
benefits to society are equally uncertain and overstated?
    Response. Actions taken to comply with the proposed
guidelines will reduce emissions of CO2 2 and other
air pollutants, including SO2 NOx and
directly emitted PM2.5 , from the electric power
industry. States will make the ultimate determination as to how
the emission guidelines are implemented. Thus, all costs and
benefits reported for this action are illustrative estimates.
The EPA has calculated illustrative costs and benefits in two
ways: One based on an assumption of individual State plans and
another based on an assumption that states will opt for multi-
State plans. The illustrative costs and benefits are based upon
compliance approaches that reflect a range of measures
consisting of improved operations at EGUs, dispatching lower-
emitting EGUs and zero-emitting energy sources, and increasing
levels of end-use energy efficiency. The annual compliance
costs are estimated using the Integrated Planning Model (IPM)
and include demand-side energy efficiency program and
participant costs as well as monitoring, reporting and
recordkeeping costs.

    Question 2. With each and every climate regulation put
forward by the administration, the supposed benefits of each
regulation continue to get smaller and smaller and more
imaginary while the costs to American taxpayers and the economy
continue to grow. A sound environmental and economic policy
would place amount of regulation, in this case carbon dioxide
emissions, where the marginal benefits are equal to the
marginal costs. It seems the opposite is true in the latest EPA
budget proposal. While carbon dioxide emissions continue to
rise across the globe, at what point will EPA begin to allocate
their limited budgetary resources to other programs that have
greater benefits to American taxpayers while imposing lower
costs on them?
    Response. By 2030, the Clean Power Plan proposal would cut
carbon emission from the power sector by 30 percent nationwide
below 2005 levels, which is equal to the emissions from
powering more than half the homes in the United States for 1
year. These measures will avoid up to 6,600 premature deaths,
up to 150,000 asthma attacks in children, and up to 490,000
missed work or school days providing up to $93 billion in
climate and public health benefits, which far outweigh the
costs of the plan.

    Question 3. In the fiscal year budget request, EPA notes it
will be finalizing rules for formaldehyde emissions in
composite wood products. Why has EPA decided to regulate
laminated products when the authorizing legislation gives you
authority to exempt those products? The testing costs far
exceed any benefit considering that studies submitted to EPA
show that the value added process of finishing laminated
products can reduce the emission profile of an already
compliant platform.
    Response. The Formaldehyde Standards for Composite Wood
Products Act (TSCA Title VI), enacted by Congress in 2010,
establishes formaldehyde emissions standards for hardwood
plywood, particleboard, and medium density-fiberboard. Congress
also provided the EPA with the authority to exempt some or all
laminated products from the definition of hardwood plywood
pursuant to a rulemaking under TSCA Title VI, which shall be
promulgated ``in a manner that ensures compliance with the
[statutory] emission standards.'' The information available to
the EPA at the time the regulations were proposed in June of
2013 did not indicate that laminated products would be in
compliance with the emission standards, and therefore the
agency did not propose an exemption for all laminated products
from the proposed regulations. The agency did however, propose
to exempt laminated products that are made with compliant cores
and laminated with ``no-added-formaldehyde'' resins because we
concluded that such exemptions would be consistent with the
statutory directive.
    As directed by the Act, the EPA is continuing to evaluate
all available and relevant information from State authorities,
industry, and other available sources to determine whether the
definition of hardwood plywood should exempt engineered veneer
or any laminated product. In an ongoing effort to reach out to
potentially affected stakeholders, the EPA met and continues to
meet with companies and trade associations that represent,
among other members, producers of laminated products. As part
of this effort, the EPA has specifically requested data on
formaldehyde emissions from laminated products, as well as
comments and information on the proposed definition of
laminated products. The initial comment period for the
implementing regulations was twice extended at the request of a
number of industry stakeholders and closed on October 9, 2013.
In spring 2014, the EPA provided an additional public comment
period on the proposed rule and conducted a public meeting on
laminated products to address issues of concern to
stakeholders. In addition, the EPA has met regularly with the
California Air Resources Board (CARB). The agency is working to
develop an approach to laminated products that would address
potentially significant formaldehyde emissions while
recognizing industry concerns over testing costs and burdens,
particularly for small businesses.

    Question 4. With respect to the ongoing rulemaking on
formaldehyde emissions in composite wood products, you recently
stated that laminates could potentially be a ``significant
source of emissions.'' Does EPA have scientific data that
validates that statement? Will you share it with the committee?
Data submitted to the public record during the rulemaking shows
that the value added process of finishing laminated products
can reduce the emission profile of an already compliant
platform.
    Response. In developing the proposed laminated products
provisions, the EPA consulted several sources of information,
including a 2003 Composite Panel Association technical bulletin
on laminates, as well as information provided by small entity
representatives to the Small Business Advocacy Review Panel
held for the proposed regulations. During the public comment
periods, the EPA received additional information, including
test results that appear to confirm that the lamination process
can increase formaldehyde emissions. The California Air
Resources Board (CARB) submitted results from their testing of
laminated products, which are available in the docket for this
rulemaking at http://www.regulations.gov/
#!documentDetail;D=EPA-HQ-OPPT-2012-0018-0515 and are also
attached. According to CARB, the results indicated that, in
several instances, the laminated products emitted considerably
more formaldehyde than was emitted by the cores, likely due to
the urea-formaldehyde resin used to affix the veneer. In
addition, CARB noted that, while most samples with no stain or
finish had higher emissions than identical products with a
stain, indicating that the application of stain can reduce
formaldehyde off-gassing and decrease exposures to
formaldehyde, a number of samples with a stain still emitted
more formaldehyde than the cores.

    Question 5. The academic and scientific communities are
actively pursuing research into the magnitude of methane
emissions from various sectors of the U.S. economy. With much
of this research outstanding, why doesn't EPA wait to
understand the major sources of methane emissions before
promulgating regulation?
    Response. Methane, the key constituent of natural gas, is a
potent greenhouse gas with a global warming potential more than
25 times greater than that of carbon dioxide. Nearly 30 percent
of methane emissions in the U.S. in 2012 came from oil
production and the production, processing, transmission and
distribution of natural gas. Methane emissions are projected to
increase by about 25 percent over the next decade if additional
steps are not taken to reduce emissions from this rapidly
growing industry.

    Question 6. EPA's announcement last month on methane
regulation indicated that there was no intention to regulate
existing sources in the oil and gas industry at this time,
instead, the agency would allow for voluntary actions by
industry for existing sources. Aren't the control technique
guidelines, coupled with your pending ozone regulation
essentially a defacto regulation of existing sources in the
industry?
    Response. The EPA will develop new guidelines to assist
states in reducing ozone-forming pollutants from existing oil
and gas systems in areas that do not meet the ozone health
standard and in states in the Ozone Transport Region. These
guidelines will also reduce methane emissions in these areas.
The guidelines will help states that are developing clean air
ozone plans by providing a ready-to-adopt control measure that
they can include in those plans.

    Senator Inhofe. Thank you very much.
    We are going to have 6-minute rounds and use the early bird
rule which we established when we changed things around here. I
will begin and probably will not take all of my time because I
want to reserve some in case some of my colleagues want to have
more time.
    The EPA is asking for, as I said in my opening statement,
$3.5 million for additional attorneys and lawyers to defend
their proposals. My question would be if the States requested a
judicial stay of the rule after it is finalized to allow for
legal challenges to the rule to be resolved, would the EPA
object to that request for a stay?
    Ms. McCarthy. We see no reason for a stay in the rule,
Senator, but if you are looking at the lawyers we are asking
for.
    Senator Inhofe. I am talking about the existing source
rule.
    Ms. McCarthy. We are not interested in staying any of the
rules, Senator. We don't think there is a reason for it. We are
moving ahead to finalize those rules.
    The lawyer issue is not related to our climate effort. It
is related to regional and headquarters efforts to provide the
resources we need to smoothly move through permits, to get our
legal positions on our rules effectively identified and
commented on.
    Senator Inhofe. I understand your answer is no. Now I will
ask the second part of that question. As soon as some of the
States refuse to submit a SIP, a State program, or if the EPA
denies the State SIP, would the EPA consider withholding
Federal highway funding or would you say no?
    Ms. McCarthy. This is not a traditional State SIP under the
national ambient air quality standards. There are other
processes for us to work with States. Clearly our hope is that
States will provide the necessary plans. If not, there will be
a Federal system in place to allow us to move forward.
    Senator Inhofe. For the benefit of some who may not be
aware of why we have been talking so much up here, it seems
like every hearing we have turns into a global warming hearing.
One of the reasons people are talking about doing this through
regulation is that ever since 2003 we have had four votes in
the U.S. Senate to go ahead and do something, have some kind of
cap and trade they are now talking about doing through
regulation.
    It was soundly defeated four times. Now the Obama
administration is saying we will do through regulation what we
were unable to do through legislation.
    Ozone is a big deal for a lot of us. The 2008
implementation program, which planned for a 2008 ozone NAAQS
was issued 2 weeks ago. I made the statement in my opening that
there are a lot of States which have not complied with 2008,
correct?
    Ms. McCarthy. That is correct.
    Senator Inhofe. Do you know how many States?
    Ms. McCarthy. I do not know, sir, because we are in the
early stages of implementing the 2008 standard.
    Senator Inhofe. We have a standard of 75 ppb. A new
standard they have tested down to 65 ppb and even 60 ppb. Even
65 ppb, in my State of Oklahoma, would put all 77 of our
counties out of attainment. That is a very serious thing.
    What is the justification for going ahead and moving toward
this before we have had compliance with the 2008 regulations?
What is your justification for that?
    Ms. McCarthy. Actually, we are under a court order to move
forward because the Clean Air Act enacted by Congress requires
us to review these every 5 years and we are significantly
behind.
    The good news is this rule is simply looking at the level
we need to achieve in order to protect public health and
welfare. That is what we are going to be making a decision on.
    Senator Inhofe. As opposed to moving on with that rule?
    Ms. McCarthy. We don't have an option here. The Clean Air
Act requires us to look at the science as it is updated every 5
years. The court has told us that is what it says over and
over.
    Senator Inhofe. That same court was there in 2008 when many
States had not complied with that. That is my point. I don't
see any logical reason we would move to a more stringent
standard when we haven't complied with that.
    I am going to save the remaining 2 minutes of my time.
Senator Cardin?
    Senator Cardin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it
very much and appreciate this hearing.
    Ms. McCarthy, it is always a pleasure to have you before
the committee.
    Senator Inhofe. I am going to interrupt you. She has been
chairman for the last 8 years and I am just not used to this,
so I won't recognize you. I will recognize Senator Boxer next.
    Senator Boxer. To thoroughly confuse matters, I yield my
time to Senator Cardin and will take mine later.
    Senator Cardin. Thank you, Senator Boxer and thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
    Mr. Chairman, I just want to make a point. Only in the U.S.
Senate would getting a majority vote, 50 some votes, in favor
of a proposal be characterized as soundly defeated.
    My recollection is the cap and trade provision, to which
you referred, got over 50 votes in the U.S. Senate. I just
wanted to correct the record on that point. I am sure the
public understands that a majority is not a majority in the
U.S. Senate.
    I want to compliment you on your budget as it relates to
important priorities. I think the overall budget is a
reasonable investment in the Environmental Protection Agency
and I applaud the Administration for bringing that forward.
    I think the emphasis on climate change as it relates to
U.S. leadership that will have, I think, major dividends in
global action which help the people of our Country, is exactly
where we need to be. Your budget reflects those priorities.
    I want to first start by saying I am very supportive of the
priorities that you have set as it relates to the size of the
EPA budget and the focus on issues that are critically
important to our Country.
    I want to ask you why you are recommending a reduction in
the State Revolving Fund on clean water. I want to preface that
by telling you I know the circumstances in Maryland and the
circumstances around the Nation where water main breaks are a
daily occurrence, where we had River Road in Montgomery County
become a river threatening peoples' lives, where we have seen
businesses shut down, where we have seen the Beltway shut down
because of water main breaks. I visited Baltimore water main
facilities and found water mains that are 100 years old and in
desperate need of repair.
    Our States are crying out for more resources in the State
Revolving Fund. Can you explain to me the rationale for the
recommendation on the State Revolving Fund?
    Ms. McCarthy. Senator, there is no question that this is a
level that is $50-some odd million below what was enacted last
year. I will have to point out though it is $527 million above
what the President requested last year. We certainly recognize
there are significant challenges out there and are doing the
best we can within a conservative and appropriately designed
budget.
    Senator Cardin. I am going to let you finish your answer
but it seems to me you are saying that you are depending on
Congress to put in the right amount of money?
    Ms. McCarthy. We have actually submitted a budget that is
very close to what was enacted last year. We are trying to
address the issue in a variety of different ways.
    I am not suggesting that I wouldn't love to have lots of
money to address these issues but difficult choices need to be
made. I will point out that we are trying other very creative
approaches to also supplement the money that is available in
SRF so that we can target SRF appropriately. Then we have the
WIFIA Center that we are beginning to create this year.
    I think the Water Infrastructure Resiliency Finance Center
is also a very creative approach to try to address this
challenge by building more public-private partnerships.
    It is not that I don't think we could always spend more
money and spend it effectively. I am suggesting that public
sector dollars will not cover the need that is out there. We
need to find very creative approaches and also attract private
sector dollars into this venture because it matters to all of
us.
    Senator Cardin. I agree with that. I agree that we are
going to have to supplement the infrastructure financing by
creative methods, whether it is WIFIA, tax credits or public-
private partnerships. My Mayor, Stephanie Rawlings-Blake,
suggested a separate trust fund for water infrastructure. We
are going to have to do something for more.
    You need a basic program that at least is there to provide
the fundamental commitment by the Federal Government. The same
thing is true, by the way, with highway transportation. We want
our 6 year reauthorization but we also recognize we may have to
supplement that with more infrastructure in creative ways.
    Maybe my math is different than yours. We can do this later
and get me the information. My staff tells me this is a 22
percent cut in the Clean Water State Revolving Fund, amounting
to a transfer of $332 million.
    Ms. McCarthy. I am sorry, I misunderstood. I thought you
meant the entire fund. The Clean Water SRF is lower because we
have shifted a lot of the additional resources to drinking
water. As a whole, it is $2.302 billion we are proposing.
    Senator Cardin. The State Revolving Fund that deals with
our wastewater treatment facilities are cut by 22 percent?
    Ms. McCarthy. That is because the shift is going to
drinking water for the first time in quite a while because the
need on drinking water is even more severe than the need for
wastewater at this point. I can show you, and certainly will
provide your staff with the figures.
    Senator Cardin. We need modern drinking water for capacity
but if we don't deal with wastewater treatment, we are going to
have problems with clean water in our streams. I can assure you
of that. It is a major source of pollution for our water
bodies.
    Ms. McCarthy. I totally agree with you. We would be able to
utilize money effectively. This is, I think, a reasonable
approach to start recognizing that at this point, drinking
water has not been appropriately funded and that we need to
make some shift in that fund. We are certainly able and willing
to talk to folks about why we believe that is the case.
    Senator Cardin. We are half right and half wrong. Drinking
water needs more, but you shouldn't be cutting the State
Revolving Fund.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you.
    Senator Wicker.
    Senator Wicker. Thank you very much.
    First of all, I would like to ask unanimous consent to
enter into the record, an article, an op-ed, from the Wall
Street Journal of September 19, 2014 by Steven E. Koonin,
entitled Climate Science Is Not Settled.
    Senator Inhofe. Without objection.
    [The referenced information follows:]
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4980.007

    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4980.008

    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4980.009

    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4980.010

    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4980.011

    Senator Wicker. I would point out to our witness and also
to the members of the committee that Steven E. Koonin,
interestingly enough, was Under Secretary of Science in the
Energy Department during President Obama's first term and is
currently Director of the Center for Urban Science and Progress
at New York University. Yet, he authors an essay entitled,
Climate Science Is Not Settled.
    I am going to read extensively from it in the time I have.
Mr. Koonin starts by saying, ``The idea that `Climate science
is settled' runs through today's popular and policy
discussions. Unfortunately, that claim is misguided. ``It has
not only distorted our public and policy debates on issues
related to energy, greenhouse-gas emissions and the
environment, but it also has inhibited the scientific and
policy discussions that we need to have about our climate
future.
    He sounds like you, Mr. Chairman. At this point, he says,
``The crucial scientific question for policy isn't whether the
climate is changing. That is a settled matter. The climate has
always changed and always will.''
    The author also believes humans are influencing the
climate, but he says, this, ``The impact of human activity
appears to be comparable to the intrinsic natural variability
of the climate system itself. The crucial unsettled scientific
question for policy is how will the climate change over the
next century under both natural and human influences. Answers
to that question at the global and regional levels as well as
to the equally complex questions of how ecosystems and human
activities will be affected should inform our choices about
energy and infrastructure.''
    There is one other sentence that I will quote at this
point. ``Even though human influences could have serious
consequences for the climate, they are physically small in
relation to the climate system as a whole.'' I think that is a
very interesting and balanced opinion piece raising doubts
about the question of whether this is settled science.
    I also would simply respond to what the Ranking Member said
about deteriorating sea ice. I would point out to my colleagues
that as a matter of fact, according to NOAA, indeed arctic ice
in January of this year was 6.3 percent below the 20 year
average from 1981-2010.
    However, at the same moment, Antarctic sea ice is the
largest on record, 44.6 percent above the 1981 to 2010 average.
Deteriorating sea ice may be happening to 6.3 percent extent in
the Arctic but it seems to be increasing by 44.6 percent in the
Antarctic.
    Director McCarthy, I noticed and would call to your
attention that Congressman Whitfield in the House submitted
questions on June 19, 2014 to EPA concerning the carbon dioxide
regulation for power plants. He received a letter finally on
February 11, 2015. I just wondered, Administrator McCarthy, if
since that time you have a better answer to those questions.
The questions concern power plants. Has EPA estimated the
impact of this proposed CO2 rule for existing power
plants in terms of global mean temperature?
    The answer includes this sentence, ``Although EPA has not
explicitly modeled the temperature impacts of this rule, the
clean power plant has an important and significant contribution
to emission reductions.'' In other words, EPA cannot tell
Congressman Whitfield, in answer to his question, to what
extent is the temperature going to be impacted by this clean
power rule.
    Further, he asked, ``Has EPA estimated the impact of the
proposed CO2 rule for existing power plants in terms
of global mean sea level rise?'' Again, the EPA was unable to
answer his question: ``The EPA has not explicitly modeled the
sea level rise impacts of this rule.''
    I will tell you what is going to happen because of this
rule to my State of Mississippi. It is going to be devastating
to the economy. The Mississippi Energy Institute says, ``The
estimated cost to Mississippi ratepayers is $14 billion by
2030, not including fuel costs. Mississippi is projected under
this power plan to experience the largest increase in
electricity production costs of any State, a 177 percent
increase.''
    I would say to my colleagues, and I would say to you,
Administrator McCarthy, we know the negative effects on the
hardworking people of my State in terms of how much money they
are going to have to pay, but your agency is unable to say in a
6-month time in answer to a question submitted by the chairman
of the subcommittee what impact, if any, it will have on global
temperature and was unable to say what impact, if any the rule
would have on sea level rise.
    It seems to me the answer is, well, it is bound to help. We
know it is going to increase electricity rates by 177 percent,
cost jobs and make it harder for the people in my State, but we
just think it is bound to help in some way although we cannot
quantify that.
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Mr. Wicker.
    Senator Boxer.
    Senator Boxer. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
    I am going to ask unanimous consent to place into the
record the series of votes that the Senate has taken regarding
climate change. Is that OK with you?
    Senator Inhofe. Without objection.
    [The referenced information follows:]
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4980.023

    Senator Inhofe. I have the same list, I believe. If yours
is different, then I would ask unanimous consent that next to
yours, that is granted, I will have mine. Without objection, so
ordered.
    [The referenced information follows:]
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4980.073

    Senator Boxer. May I ask that I get back the 10 seconds
that my friend stole from me?
    Senator Inhofe. You have it.
    Senator Boxer. Here is the deal. We started voting on
climate change issues in 2003. We got our clocks cleaned in
2003 and 2005, absolutely true. In 2008, we had, absent
Senators Collins, Martinez, Smith, Snowe, McCain and Coleman,
by letter saying they were with us, that would have been 56 to
36 in favor of a cap and trade plan know as the Climate
Security Act, Lieberman-Warner. We had 4 short of 60. We had a
majority.
    Then we had a Murkowski joint resolution to disapprove the
ruling on the endangerment finding. That failed, 47 to 53.
    Then on April 6, 2011, we had a 50 to 50 vote on the
McConnell amendment to prohibit the Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency from promulgating any
regulation concerning climate. That failed.
    Then we had an astounding vote. I voted with my chairman,
98 to 1, climate change is not a hoax, yes. That was really a
huge admission.
    Today, we hear from my friend, Ted Wicker. I take this out
of context. I think what I heard you say was that there are
scientists now that you respect saying that human activity does
have an impact. You said it is offset by other things, but this
is the first time I have ever heard you say that. In my mind, I
think we are gaining ground, not fast enough for our grandkids,
but we are gaining ground.
    On the sea ice, I wanted to talk to my friend because I saw
an amazing presentation by NOAA on what is happening to the
ice. You are right about Antarctic versus Arctic, but there is
just more ice, it is just that it is thinner. We will talk
about that because I think that is a very important point you
are making on the ice.
    Back to you, Administrator McCarthy. The EPA's budget
supports implementation of the President's Climate Action Plan
by allocating funding for efforts to establish limits under the
Clean Air Act on carbon pollution from cars, trucks and power
plants.
    All these actions consistent with the three Supreme Court
decisions in Massachusetts v. EPA of 2007, American Electric
Power v. Connecticut in 2011, and Utility Air Resources Group
v. EPA of 2014, are your actions consistent with the Supreme
Court decisions or is your rogue agency making up this stuff as
you go along?
    Ms. McCarthy. They are consistent with the decisions and
laws that this body has passed.
    Senator Boxer. Isn't it true that if you were not to move
forward, you could be subjected to lawsuits by are families who
are concerned about these issues?
    Ms. McCarthy. I am quite sure.
    Senator Boxer. EPA's Revolving Loan Program for drinking
and wastewater infrastructure help to ensure the water we drink
is safe and that our lakes and rivers are clean. This is a
place where I think there is bipartisan concern about the
budget.
    We see a net cut of $53 million. Can you explain how EPA
will ensure adequate investments in clean and drinking water
given these cuts?
    Ms. McCarthy. EPA believes that the total $2.302 billion
investment in SRF which includes drinking water and clean water
is a significant step forward. We certainly understand there
may be interests in additional funding.
    The absolute need of the drinking water supply that we have
identified so far is $348 billion. On the clean water side, it
is $298 billion in needed investment. We understand that these
are issues that will take yearly significant investments.
    The challenge we have is with our limited budget, we have a
number of core functions in which we need to provide resources
in order to protect public health and the environment.
    Senator Boxer. You are saying you increased funding on one
part of the clean water mission and you cut it on the other. Is
that accurate?
    Ms. McCarthy. We actually shifted funds away from the
wastewater side and shifted it into the drinking water because
there is some immediate need that we have identified, not that
there isn't an immediate need in both categories.
    Senator Boxer. My takeaway from this, I am not asking a
question, it gets back to the 20 percent cut in EPA's budget
that we have see over time is having an impact internally. In
administering landmark laws like the Clean Water Act, it is
important that Federal agencies follow the best available
science.
    Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
    Senator Boxer. Can you expand on the science used to
develop the clean water rule and how the rule reflects the best
available science?
    Ms. McCarthy. Thank you for raising this, Ranking Member.
    The clean water rule is a rule the Supreme Court actually
told us almost 6 years ago that we should do some more science
around this so we could be clear about the waters that needed
to be protected that were absolutely significant for drinking
water and other functions we are relying on.
    They told us to go back and look, which we did. We actually
did a compilation of more than 1,000 studies that had been done
and peer-reviewed. We worked with our Science Advisory Board so
that could look at that compilation, look at the assessment and
do a peer review.
    We have done the science. We need to be able to reflect
better in our rules what waters are necessary to protect under
clean water. That is going to clarify issues that the States
and this body, many of you, have been asking us to clarify for
years. We are using sound, peer-reviewed science to do our job
moving forward.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Boxer.
    Let me take the chairman's prerogative and ask if you want
to respond to the last question Senator Wicker asked during his
line of questioning?
    Ms. McCarthy. There were many, sir. I understand that there
are a vast minority of scientists who believe that the
challenge of climate change isn't as significant as the
majority.
    Senator Wicker. Referring to the very last question with
regard to what benefits are we going to receive from the clean
power plant with regard to temperature and sea level which is
what I thought was the whole point.
    Ms. McCarthy. This issue was actually fairly well discussed
by the Supreme Court. When they were looking at this issue,
this is work and advice we followed, the Supreme Court said it
was very clear that carbon pollution is a danger to public
health and welfare and that efforts need to be underway to make
progress.
    The benefits that we are looking at are the benefits of
strong domestic action that will, in and of itself, send a
clear signal that we are doing what we can cost effectively and
flexibly to make progress on carbon pollution.
    It has already changed the international dynamic because
climate change cannot be addressed without significant
effective international efforts but we are going to do our
part. That is the benefit of this rule.
    To ask me whether a marathon can be accomplished without
crossing the first mile, I would say you can't do it. While
this won't get us to a cleaner, to address fully the issue of
climate change, it gets us out of the gate, it gets us running
and it provides the impetus and energy that we need to prove
the actions we need to address climate change are both
economically sound and are going to be providing us great
national security and we are going to be able to move this ball
forward internationally which is the forum for finally
addressing climate change in the most comprehensive and
cohesive way.
    Senator Wicker. Twenty seconds, Mr. Chairman.
    Senator Inhofe. Yes, out of my time.
    Senator Wicker. I would simply observe the Supreme Court
has a legalistic view of this but we have policy decisions to
make as legislators and representatives of the taxpayers. It
might be when all this is said and done we have the whole
international community agreeing on what we should do, that
this is going to prevent sea level from rising a quarter of an
inch.
    I might decide that is not worth a 177 percent increase in
electric rates for my citizens in my State. It might be that
they would conclude it is going to help by one degree globally.
I might conclude that is just not worth the loss of jobs for
Americans.
    Senator Inhofe. My time is down to 1 minute now.
    Senator Sullivan?
    Senator Sullivan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Administrator McCarthy, it is good to see you again.
    Ms. McCarthy. You too.
    Senator Sullivan. I always think it is important to get on
the record at these hearings how important clean water is and
clean air. As I have mentioned before, in Alaska, we have the
most pristine environment in the world. Alaskans are really
great about taking care of it.
    As a matter of fact, I think we care about our environment
a lot more than a lot of people in this town. We have a
tremendously good record of taking care of that environment.
    I think one of the things they are most concerned about is
two interrelated themes that most Alaskans, I would say the
vast majority, is concerned about. Your agency is not
accountable. It is not accountable to the law. Most
importantly, it is not accountable to the people where you are
not listening to the people or the States. I will get into that
in a minute.
    Then you rush to get out rules which is of concern. Where
we think you are trying to put out an agenda that is not based
in the law to quickly get that agenda established before you
leave office.
    On accountability, I think there is a whole host of issues
we can talk about but from my perspective, this is a really big
issue for me. Accountability starts at the top. Last year,
there was a glowing Wall Street Journal profile on you but some
of us found it rather disturbing.
    You were up in Alaska, honored by the Alaska Native people
with gifts, which is a big deal in my State. You were quoted in
the article about one of the gifts, which was a pen, that you
threw the f--ing thing away, was your quote. A young girl gave
you a jar of moose meat from Native people that you said,
``could gag a maggot.''
    A lot of people saw that as a glowing article. Most people
in Alaska saw it as an incredible disrespect to the people of
my State. To me when the leader of an agency comes to a State
and makes those kinds of statements to a national newspaper, it
doesn't show that you are focused on serving the people you are
required to serve.
    Have you had the opportunity to make a comment on that, to
apologize? If you would like to apologize here publicly, that
would be fine.
    Ms. McCarthy. I am happy to apologize for those remarks. I
will tell you they were taken out of context but it doesn't
matter because they hurt individual tribes I care about.
    Senator Sullivan. They sure did. Thank you for apologizing.
    Ms. McCarthy. No problem.
    Senator Sullivan. The clean water rule, the ``waters of the
U.S.'' rule, is one of these issues that when you talk about no
support, either in the law or the people, I think it is
something that is happening right now.
    My view is this is executive amnesty for water. Let me give
you a reason why. In 2009, the EPA proposed expanding the clean
water jurisdiction, is that true, through the Congress?
    Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
    Senator Sullivan. You did. It went nowhere in the Congress
in terms of the bills that were submitted in 2009 to expand the
clean water jurisdiction.
    Ms. McCarthy. We never proposed such bills, sir.
    Senator Sullivan. For the record, we can get the bills that
were proposed, a letter from your predecessor on expanding the
jurisdiction of the Clean Water Act.
    When that happens and the Congress doesn't move on that,
the Administration is not allowed to simply say, we are going
to do it with a rule. That rule will expand the jurisdiction of
the EPA in Alaska over our waters by approximately 40 percent,
in a State that already has 60 percent of all waters in the
United States in Alaska covered by the Clean Water Act.
    In this last hearing, I asked for your legal opinion on
where you got the legal authority. We still have not received
that. Can you get that opinion to us?
    Ms. McCarthy. Senator, I have been very clear. I have no
authority to expand the jurisdiction of the Clean Water Act,
nor am I proposing through a rulemaking to do that.
    Senator Sullivan. There are a lot of people who disagree
with that. We would like to see your legal opinion that gives
you the authority to propose this rule.
    Ms. McCarthy. I have no legal opinion to support that
position. I am not doing that.
    Senator Sullivan. Don't you do legal analysis of the rules
you propose?
    Ms. McCarthy. We do legal analysis of our rules. We do not
expand through our rulemaking the jurisdiction under the rule.
I implement.
    Senator Sullivan. That is the big issue right now. You said
you didn't do that in your clean air issue and, a lot of States
sued. The recent Supreme Court came out and said you did
exactly that, you violated the Constitution.
    There are not a lot of people who believe what you are
saying in terms of the authority. You have not done a legal
analysis on ``the waters of the U.S.'' and whether you have the
legal authority? You have no legal analysis on this?
    Ms. McCarthy. We have certainly done a legal analysis in
the proposed rule and we will explain it in the final as well
after looking at comments, but I have never claimed that the
agency can expand the jurisdiction of the law.
    Senator Sullivan. You cannot. That is why we need a legal
opinion that says you are not doing that when many people think
you are doing that. You have no legal analysis on ``the waters
of the U.S.'' right now?
    Ms. McCarthy. No. We clearly are looking at staying within
the boundaries of the Clean Water Act legally and using science
to implement it appropriately as the Supreme Court told us we
should do. That is what this rule is all about.
    Senator Sullivan. Mr. Chairman, if I may, I think in the
last hearing, I asked for the legal analysis that you said your
agency undertook that says that ``the waters of the U.S.,'' the
regulation you have, is a legitimate agency function because it
is based in statute.
    You said you were going to provide that. We have not seen
that.
    Ms. McCarthy. I am happy to provide you the actual clean
water rule that we proposed. It does include a legal analysis
of what we are supposed to do, what we were told by the Supreme
Court, the boundaries of the law, and explain why we are well
within those boundaries in following that advice.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Sullivan.
    Senator Whitehouse?
    Senator Whitehouse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Welcome, Administrator. How are you?
    Ms. McCarthy. I am well, Senator. How are you?
    Senator Whitehouse. I am well, thank you.
    Could you comment for a bit on EPA's track record in terms
of the cost of regulation? We come at this question with things
like the U.S. Chamber of Commerce's statement that proposed
existing power plant regulation will cost the economy 224,000
jobs and $289 billion in high electric costs through 2030. That
got replayed by colleagues of mine pretty extensively.
    Upon examination, it earned a PolitiFact false and it
earned four Pinocchios from the Washington Post Fact Checker.
We have had your predecessors, both Republican and Democrat,
here describing over and over as environmental rules have come
up, how there has developed a more or less standardized
industry response which is to exaggerate the costs, deny the
benefits and try to cast doubt about the problem.
    What is your view? Let us start with the Clean Air Act. How
has EPA's enforcement of the Clean Air Act worked to the
benefit or peril of the American people?
    Ms. McCarthy. Overall, the Clean Air Act has resulted in 70
percent reduced air pollution, while the GDP has tripled. We
have looked at all of our major rules and followed all of the
economic procedures we are supposed to follow, the best science
that we can.
    Time and time again, we actually over project the costs, so
our rules are even more cost effective than we have projected.
That is not a surprise to people who see how we follow the
rules and our transparency. Time and time again, we know we
hear the same arguments over and over again every time we
propose a rule.
    Every single time, I have never seen those lack of benefits
come through or those excess costs be realized. This Congress
has given us requirements to continue to look at cost benefit
but also to do a 20-year study of the Clean Air Act and how
those benefits have been realized. The benefits have far
exceeded even the individual benefits we estimated for each of
those individual rules.
    It is a tremendous opportunity to improve public health and
protect the environment. We are going to continue to implement
it effectively and cost effectively.
    Senator Whitehouse. Over and over again, the American
people have been economic winners as well as public health
winners because of EPA regulations?
    Ms. McCarthy. We have shown that we identify for people
what the public health goals have to be to keep themselves and
their families safe. It sparks innovation, it grows jobs, it
helps us maintain a robust economy and it keeps our lifestyle
that we are so used to in this Country available to everyone.
    It is part and parcel of how we have grown the economy in
this Country. I am sure hoping that continues.
    Senator Whitehouse. The question of carbon pollution
continues to be debated. As you said, the debate is getting
increasingly one-sided as an amazing majority of scientists and
every single major scientific organization in the Country comes
down on the side of the importance of coping with carbon
pollution.
    In addition to your obligation to follow the best available
science, which you do in this, you also have an obligation to
follow the law. The Supreme Court has spoken quite clearly to
the question of carbon pollution, has it not?
    Ms. McCarthy. Quite a few times, yes.
    Senator Whitehouse. Using those words, defining carbon
emissions as a pollutant, correct?
    Ms. McCarthy. They have also indicated that EPA's science,
I cannot quote it directly but the word outstanding comes to my
mind. They vilified that we have done everything we could on
the science side and we have proven our case.
    Senator Whitehouse. I think it is important to note the
history we began with because it casts a spotlight on whether
or not we really have a legitimate discrepancy in scientific
opinion or whether this is simply the rollout of a repeat
performance that has happened over and over again whenever an
industry has faced a new regulation to protect the public
health in which they create artificial doubt with a stable of
basically kept scientists.
    I think it is important that we bear that in mind and that
the public keep an eye on that as well. Would you agree there
is a difference between a legitimate, scientific debate and
this campaign of doubt casting that has pre-existed the fight
over carbon? It goes all the way back to whether tobacco was
safe or not. The tobacco industry was the great proponent and
inventor of this theory, was it not?
    Ms. McCarthy. Yes, and I am certainly aware that the wealth
of science we have that shows that climate change is real, it
is happening, and it is a threat. Humans are causing the
majority of that threat. It is supported by the majority of
scientists and frankly, the public in the U.S. at this point as
well. They are concerned. The impacts are already being felt.
    Climate change is not a religion or a belief system. It is
a science fact and challenges us to move forward with the
actions we need to do to protect future generations.
    Senator Whitehouse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Whitehouse.
    Next we will hear from Senator Sessions but first, I do
have my last remaining minute of which I am going to give 45
seconds to Senator Sullivan. Let me just quote one of the
imminent scientists of the many, many scientists who believe
this, Richard Lindzen, from MIT who made the statement that
``controlling carbon is a bureaucrat's dream. If you control
carbon, you control life.'' Many, many scientists out there
agree with that.
    Senator, if you finish your line of thinking there, you may
have 45 seconds.
    Senator Sullivan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    I just want to wrap up the discussion on the issue of the
legality of your actions. There are a lot of people in Alaska,
and I think throughout the Country, who are doubting the legal
basis for which your agency is acting.
    Mr. Chairman, for the record, I would like to submit a Wall
Street Journal editorial called, A Constitutional Tutorial for
Obama, the President and EPA do not possess an heralded power
to rewrite laws, and more recently, a Wall Street Journal op-ed
from Harvard professor, Laurence Tribe, The Clean Power Act is
Unconstitutional, where Laurence Tribe says, ``Frustration with
congressional inaction cannot justify throwing the Constitution
overboard to rescue this lawless EPA proposal.''
    [The referenced information follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Sullivan. I would like to wrap up with one final
question. What is the rush on ``the waters of the U.S.''
regulation? You are expediting it. Isn't it true that OMB
allowed you to expedite this because they said it wasn't a
major rule? You are expediting this rule when 35 States have
said they oppose it and over 1 million comments have not been
placed online on this rule. It seems to me that you are rushing
this.
    Again, we would like to see the legal basis for you moving
outside the normal procedures for the timeline of a rule that
is going to impact dramatic parts of the Country and huge parts
of my State.
    Ms. McCarthy. Very quickly, first of all, the reason we are
moving forward with this rule is we are in no rush. In fact,
the questions began in 2001. We are moving it forward. We
actually have been requested by States, by industries, by
farming and ranching groups to move forward with the rulemaking
to provide clarity. We are moving for our constituencies, the
people who are confused and need answers.
    We have not had 35 States tell us. There have been
individuals representing various constituencies in States or
different offices in States who have commented, but we have
received over 1 million comments and 87.1 percent of those
comments we have counted so far--we are only missing 4,000--are
supportive of this rule. Let me repeat, 87.1 percent of those
one plus million are supportive of this rule.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you.
    Senator Sessions?
    Senator Sessions. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    As a member of the Budget Committee and somewhat familiar
with the Budget Control Act which contained the growth of
spending, I think EPA this year should be flat spending or at
least no more than 2.5 percent increase. You are proposing a 6
percent increase. Where does the money come from? Are you
proposing to break the limitations?
    Ms. McCarthy. It is part of the President's proposal which
is not going to buy into the bad policy of sequestration, but
he has designed a budget that can accommodate this.
    Senator Sessions. The inflation rate in the United States
is about 2 percent, so you want to have a three times the
inflation rate increase in spending. I would suggest that when
we go to our States, the group we have most complaints about
from our constituency, highway people, whether it is our
farmers, our energy people, is the Environmental Protection
Agency. It is an extraordinary overreach.
    You apparently are unaware of the pushback that is
occurring in the real world. I just want to tell you I am not
inclined to increase your funding 6 percent a buck. Now you say
we have a crisis and there are dangers out there.
    In an article by Mr. Lumbergh, who testified before the
Budget Committee from the Copenhagen Institute, along with Dr.
Pioki from Colorado, ``We have had fewer droughts in recent
years.'' Do you dispute that?
    Ms. McCarthy. I don't know in what context he is making
statements like that, but I certainly can tell you about the
droughts that are happening today.
    Senator Sessions. No, no, I am not arguing to you today
that you are wrong about global warming because we have a cold
spell. I am asking you what are the worldwide data about
whether or not we are having fewer or less droughts.
    Ms. McCarthy. I will be happy to provide it, but I
certainly am aware that droughts are becoming more extreme and
frequent.
    Senator Sessions. You are aware that the IPCC has found
that moisture content of the soil is, if anything, slightly
greater than it has been over the last decade in their report.
Are you aware of that?
    Ms. McCarthy. I don't know what you are referring to,
Senator, but I am happy to respond.
    Senator Sessions. You need to know because you are asking
this economy to sustain tremendous costs and you don't know
whether or not the soil worldwide is more or less moist?
    Ms. McCarthy. I don't know where your cost figures are
coming from.
    Senator Sessions. I am quoting the IPCC. What about
hurricanes? We had more or less hurricanes in the last decade?
    Ms. McCarthy. There have been more frequent hurricanes and
more intense. In terms of landing, those hurricanes on land, I
cannot answer that question. It is a very complicated issue.
    Senator Sessions. It is not complicated on how many landed.
We have had dramatic reduction in the number. We have gone a
decade without a Class III or above hurricane.
    Ms. McCarthy. The scientists are not really considering
that number to be significant because the subset is so small
that you are looking at, you are taking issues in science out
of context.
    Senator Sessions. Are you asserting that you have evidence
that we have greater hurricanes around the world in the last
decade than the previous decade?
    Ms. McCarthy. I am asserting that I have plenty of
evidence, factual evidence from scientists who know this issue
that climate change is happening, it is real, and it is
happening now.
    Senator Sessions. Of course the climate is changing, Ms.
McCarthy. You have been saying we have more storms. Will you
submit within a few days, it shouldn't take long, a showing
that we have had more storms in the last decade?
    Ms. McCarthy. When you say ``we,'' what are we talking
about, the U.S.?
    Senator Sessions. The world.
    Ms. McCarthy. I am happy to submit the full breadth of
science that we have behind climate. We have submitted it and
will submitted it again.
    Senator Sessions. Would you acknowledge that over the last
18 years, the increase in temperature has been very little and
that it is well below, 90 percent below most of the
environmental models that show how fast temperature would
increase?
    Ms. McCarthy. No, I would not agree with that. A 1-degree
temperature is significant.
    Senator Sessions. I am asking below the models or above the
models?
    Ms. McCarthy. I do not know what the models are actually
predicting that you are referring to. There are many models and
sometimes it is actually going faster and sometimes slightly
slower than the model predicts, but on the whole, it makes no
difference to the validity and the robustness of climate
science that is telling us that we are facing an absolute
challenge that we must address both environmentally and
economically from a national security perspective, and for EPA,
from a public health perspective.
    Senator Sessions. Carbon pollution, CO2, is really not a
pollutant. It is a plant food and it does not harm anybody
except that it might include temperature increases.
    Let me ask you one more time, just give me this answer. If
you take the average for the models predicting how fast the
temperature would increase or is the temperature in fact
increasing less than that or more than that?
    Ms. McCarthy. I cannot answer that question specifically.
    Senator Sessions. Mr. Chairman, I would say this is a
stunning development, that the head of the Environment
Protection Agency, who should know more than anybody else in
the world, who is imposing hundreds of billions of dollars in
costs to prevent climate and temperature increases, doesn't
know whether their projections have been all along.
    Ms. McCarthy. Whose projections? What models, sir?
    Senator Sessions. Where do you get the information that the
temperature is increasing? Isn't it from climate models
produced by scientists around the world that projected certain
increases as the actual temperature increased at that rate?
    Ms. McCarthy. It depends on what you are looking at. In the
timeframe of climate, which is trends, absolutely, positively.
    Senator Sessions. Would you submit to me a written document
that explains how you believe the models have been proven
correct and whether or not, I will ask this specific question,
had it increased less than projected or more than projected?
    Ms. McCarthy. I would be happy to provide you the
information. My concern is you are not looking at climate in
the kind of trend lines that climate determines. Sometimes you
were asking us did we get it right last year, did we get it
right the prior 4 years, instead of looking at this as climate
demands. This isn't weather patterns. This is a partitive time.
If you look at the last century, we have had changes in our
climate that we should not have seen over a span of 1,000
years.
    Senator Inhofe. I am sure that Senator Sessions is looking
forward to getting your written document.
    We wanted to hear from Senator Markey but we have a
unanimous consent request by Senator Vitter.
    Senator Vitter. Actually, Mr. Chairman, I will pass and try
to stay around. Thank you.
    Senator Inhofe. Senator Markey.
    Senator Markey. Thank you.
    Senator Sessions, they have a big stunning development in
Massachusetts. It is that temperatures off the coast of
Massachusetts and the Atlantic have been measured at 20 degrees
above normal.
    What is happening is this Arctic vortex is being sent down
in larger amounts than ever seen before as Anchorage has almost
no snow on its grounds, leads to this cold air lingering longer
over Massachusetts and then hitting this 20 degree warmer than
normal Atlantic Ocean which then leads to more moisture and
more precipitation which then leads to us breaking the record
for the most snow in history.
    That is not weather; that is climate. There is a
distinction between these things. The reason we know things are
changing off the coast of Massachusetts is NOAA, NASA and
predecessor agencies have been using thermometers since the
1880's to actually take the temperature of the water and the
air. They just write it down each year.
    They do that all around the world, actually. Scientists all
around the world keep these temperatures.
    The reason we know it is happening is that people have been
using thermometers over all these years. It is not a more
sophisticated technology, it is exactly the same technology,
probably costs more but it is the same exact device.
    We are now suffering from that in Massachusetts. It is
climate. There is an intensity, an extra level of effect that
it creates.
    I would like to point out that in the op-ed of Steven
Koonin, that Senator Wicker put in the record, there was one
sentence he left out. That sentence says, ``Uncertainty need
not be an excuse for inaction.'' I applaud the EPA for all of
its great work. I thank you, Madam Administrator, for what you
have done on this issue.
    I would like to move the renewable energy component of your
clean power plant rules and ask, as you finalize these rules,
will you be incorporating up to date renewable costs so what is
truly achievable is reflected?
    Ms. McCarthy. Yes, sir, we will.
    Senator Markey. The renewable fuels standard is another
policy where technology and innovation can help reduce carbon
pollution. Last year, facilities with almost 60 million gallons
of cellulosic ethanol fuel per year capacity on line. Another
30 million gallons per year of facility was set up this year.
    To continue that growth and investment, the advanced
biofuels industry needs policy certainty. Will the upcoming
renewable fuels standard proposal reflect developments in
cellulosic and advanced biofuels and support their growth in
the future as was the intent of the 2007 legislative language?
    Ms. McCarthy. Yes, sir.
    Senator Markey. Can you elaborate a little?
    Ms. McCarthy. I think the challenge for us has been the
requirement to annually look at these budgets. We are looking
at ways in which we can send longer term signals to the market
so that advancements like cellulosic can really find investment
opportunity on a longer term basis that they need to continue
to grow.
    Senator Markey. I was the co-author of that language in
2007. Then it was cellulosic but then we went almost
immediately into a recession which hurt that industry.
    Ms. McCarthy. It has really taken off.
    Senator Markey. It did not get its initial shot but in
normal economic conditions, we are quite confident it will be
successful.
    I want to turn to EPA's work to keep our water clean.
Between 1979 and 2001, about 15 football fields were the
wetlands that feed into the historic Buzzards Bay in
Massachusetts were cleaned of all vegetation and pollutants
with high levels of fertilizer and pesticides that contaminated
the waters that feed into the Bay. It was all done without
notification or permitting.
    The EPA tried to take action against the polluters using
its Clean Water Act authority but more than 15 years later, the
case is still not resolved and the wetlands have never been
restored.
    The reason this case remains in limbo is that the Supreme
Court was unable to make up its mind about whether wetlands are
bodies of water that fall under the Clean Water Act's
jurisdiction.
    Rather than perpetuate the uncertainty that the Supreme
Court created, EPA responded to requests from religious
organizations, small businesses, public health groups,
sportsmen's associations and State leaders to craft a
definition of which types of water bodies can be subject to
enforcement under the Clean Water Act and which cannot.
    Isn't it true that the EPA, as it reviews more than 1,200
peer-reviewed, scientific papers and other data, established a
Scientific Advisory Board of 26 independent scientists to
review the EPA's work, reached out to stakeholders in every
single State and reviewed more than 1 million comments on the
proposed rule?
    Ms. McCarthy. That is true.
    Senator Markey. Isn't it true that more than 30 Republican
Senators and House members publicly called on EPA to write a
rule instead of just issuing guidance like EPA initially
planned to do?
    Ms. McCarthy. That is true.
    Senator Markey. Isn't it true that when this rule is
finalized, it will actually cover fewer water bodies than was
the case under policies that were promulgated by the Reagan
administration and it will permanently remove types of bodies
of water from being subject to EPA's authority under the Clean
Water Act?
    Ms. McCarthy. That is correct.
    Senator Markey. It seems that common-sense, scientifically
based policy is being put on the books and we thank you so much
for doing that.
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Markey.
    Senator Capito?
    Senator Capito. Thank you.
    Thank you, Madam Administrator. I appreciate your coming
before the committee today.
    I want to say at the onset, I think, in a bipartisan way,
we have asked questions about the technical assistance issues
through the Safe Drinking Water and the Clean Water Acts.
    It does maximize resources to a lot of localities,
municipalities and it is very important to all of us no matter
how big or small your State is.
    You know I am from the State of West Virginia. We have had
numerous conversations. As one of my colleagues said, I would
say in the State of West Virginia, if I hear disagreements,
which I hear quite a few, but EPA is always right at the
epicenter because of the impact of the regulatory environment
we have had because we are so heavily reliant on coal as our
power source.
    I would like to ask this question. You have in your remarks
that the President's budget calls for a $4 billion Clean Power
State Incentive Fund. The way I am reading this, that is a
legislative prerogative, correct? That exists outside your
budget?
    Ms. McCarthy. That is not included in our budget.
    Senator Capito. That has to be passed here in Congress
before that would ever be funded?
    Ms. McCarthy. That is correct.
    Senator Capito. I am not going to waste a lot of time on
that one because I don't think that is going to go. Although I
will say, at cross purposes there, in your remarks, you say it
helps with the financing for renewable and low income
communities, but in the analysis by the committee, the
bipartisan analysis, the quote says this would be to give
grants to States that go beyond the clean power plan?
    Ms. McCarthy. We actually have other opportunities in our
budget that speak to the issues I was referring to.
    Senator Capito. I would say if we are going to talk about
economics and environment, if $4 billion, about 50 percent of
what you are asking for today, the EPA and the President
believe that is something that will help meet the demands of
this new clean power plan. That tells me how explosively
expensive something like this would be across the Country.
Would that be a safe statement?
    Ms. McCarthy. I don't believe so, Senator. I think it is
appropriate to look at the proposal that EPA put on the table
because we believe it was flexible in terms of individual
States and where they are overall in terms of our ability to
continue to keep a reliable and cost effective energy system.
    We think the goals are achievable for individual States.
The standards were set and the overall rule will be very cost
effective.
    Senator Capito. If the Administration wants an additional
$4 billion in mandatory spending, in my view--we can move on
after this. I would like to say my own DEP has said EPA
comments ``on the 111(d) proposal notes with the finesse of a
bull in a china shop, EPA intends to assert itself broadly into
the new regulatory arenas that impact all areas of the Nation's
economy.''
    If we are looking at the impacts of the clean power rule
and weaving a balance, you all have talked about this a lot
with me and I have a lot of frustrations at home about it. Of
those dollars you are committing to this, how much of those
dollars are actually used to model the economics?
    We have heard a lot about the science. What about the
economic effects, the job loss, communities that basically are
going to be abandoned in my State because of the poor
communities, the rise, 170 percent and that may be high, of 170
percent for that low income person in West Virginia, that
senior and their electric bill where they are already at the
end of their rope trying to meet their monthly obligations?
    How much time, effort and money do you spend to analyze
that effect when you are putting together one of these
regulations?
    Ms. McCarthy. I am happy to try to see if we can decipher
that for you.
    Senator Capito. If you could quantify that for me, I would
appreciate it.
    Ms. McCarthy. I am happy to do that. If you look at the way
in which we designed our proposal, if you look at what we are
asking in terms of additional resources on climate, you will
see we are asking for $57.7 million, $25 million of which is
technical assistance grants going to States so they can help
them with their plans. In excess of $25 million is to help
actually provide technical assistance to be able to work on
this issue.
    You will see that we are providing in the core of our
budget the funding we believe we need to implement the plan and
help States implement the plan.
    Senator Capito. I understand. Additionally, even though it
is a legislative priority, the Administration obviously feels
an extra $4 billion in mandatory spending is going to be what
is necessary for the States to meet these challenges.
    Let me ask about ozone real quick because again I think
there are big economic impacts there. The rule you said went
forward in 2008, the previous, and now we are moving to a new
standard. This is ozone?
    Ms. McCarthy. Ozone, yes.
    Senator Capito. We know there are still many States and
counties not in compliance. The President withdrew this in
2011, the same proposal, is that correct, to not move forward.
The $90 billion price tag was something he was really unable to
move forward.
    Do you believe the economy has changed so much that this
$90 billion price tag is now sustainable and whatever would be
on top of the new ozone regulations?
    Ms. McCarthy. The way this works, let me explain. The rule
being implemented will ask States to look at cost effective
opportunities for reducing pollutants that contribute to ozone.
We are setting a health protective standard.
    The rule we are looking at or the standard we are setting
now is actually going to be based on air quality in 2014, 2016,
and States will get to 2030 to actually in some cases achieve
that. National rules already in place will actually get us most
of the way to complying with that more rigorous standard if and
when the decision is made to change that standard.
    This is not a stop and start process. It is a continued
discussion and cost effective actions to us getting at the
levels of protection for public health.
    Senator Capito. My misunderstanding might be that it was a
previous rule that was supposed to meet certain standards. I am
interpreting it as a new rule that is moving you to different
standards. You are telling me it is sort of a continued rule.
    Ms. McCarthy. It is and has been continuing for 20 years
and States have been able to manage through this. Everything
you do to comply with the 2008 will provide you a strong
foundation to actually achieve what we are proposing.
    The exciting thing about these standards is if we decide to
reduce the standard to 70, only nine counties in the U.S.
outside of California are predicted to actually be out of
attainment by 2025.
    National rules already on the books are going to get us a
significant way there. It may actually get us outside of
California and give us the ability to be in attainment almost
throughout the entire Country.
    Senator Inhofe. We will recognize Senator Rounds. Senator
Rounds, would you yield for a unanimous consent request from
Senator Vitter?
    Senator Rounds. I will.
    Senator Vitter. Thank you, Senator.
    Very briefly, I just have a UC request to submit to Ms.
McCarthy, for the record, my questions, which are on existing
source performance standards and economic analysis.
    Senator Inhofe. Without objection.
    Senator Vitter. Thank you.
    Senator Inhofe. Senator Rounds.
    Senator Rounds. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Administrator McCarthy, I suspect this is something like
going to a dental appointment in terms of coming in here and
sitting down.
    Earlier, you had an opportunity to discuss a little, and I
sensed the frustration, with regard to the waters of the United
States rules and the comments made. I want to correct it
because, if not, we will come back later on and correct it.
    The Corps of Engineers basically issued the request. On
February 11, Assistant Secretary Darcy told the House
Appropriations Committee members that 37 percent of the
comments on the proposed ``waters of the United States'' rule
were in favor of the rule and 58 percent were opposed and that
others were neutral.
    On February 26, you told the House Appropriations Committee
members that 87 percent of the comments were positive and said
``all they,'' meaning the Corps, ``had completed was a review
of 2 percent of the comments and you weren't sure which 2
percent they chose.'' You said you feel badly there is
confusion. You suggested maybe the Corps should review their
numbers. Today, you issued a similar suggestion.
    I suspect that although there have been over 1 million
comments made, it seems there has also been discussion and
there are only about 20,000 of the million that would be
considered unique and substantive in terms of comments. It also
appears in discussions that these were the comments the Corps
had reviewed.
    I want to clear up any confusion. When you talk about the
substantive comments that have been made which appear to be
about 20,000, I don't know there is much disagreement on that.
    Out of the 20,000, 7,400 were unique and substantive
comments that supported the rule. When you talked about 87
percent of the comments were positive, you were talking about
the mass campaigns and the duplicative comments also received
in addition to the 20,000 substantive and unique comments that
had been there.
    Also in that 20,000, there were approximately 11,600 of
these substantive comments that were in opposition to the rule.
Am I accurate in my assessment?
    Ms. McCarthy. I don't have that exact figure, sir.
    Senator Rounds. I am trying to clear up that while I think
you were using numbers different from the Corps of Engineers,
the Corps was talking about the substantive comments and you
were looking at the gross number of total comments that have
come in overall?
    Ms. McCarthy. I would have to refer to the Corps for that.
I don't know, sir. I think the point I am really trying to make
is we have probably done a bit of disservice saying what is
opposed and what isn't opposed.
    It is important to know that people find this rule
important and obviously to get it right. We do as well. Every
comment is meaningful to us and we look at all of them. It is
important for us to do what the science and the law say and to
explain ourselves. We need to do the best job we can in the
final to have that done.
    Senator Rounds. I do agree with you that this is critical.
I think this has some far reaching impacts in terms of
individuals who before may very well not have to have
permitting in order to do the same jobs they were doing before.
    I think it is so important that when we start talking about
waters of the United States, I think this is a major rule.
Although there maybe some discussion or disagreement in terms
of the definitions of what a major rule is, there is Executive
Order 12866 directing all Federal agencies to assess economic
effects of economically significant rules. I do think this is
one of those rules.
    These rules will have a material adverse effect on any
sector of the economy such as productivity, competition or
jobs. In August 2014, a GAO study reported your agency was
writing and implementing regulations based on information that
considered the effects of regulations on employment for the
years 1979-1991. This was in 2014.
    Additionally, the study was limited to four industrial
sectors. As a result, the regulations EPA was crafting for the
United States were finalized with the assumptions that the
United States economy 20-30 years ago was the same as it is
today and involved only four industrial sectors. That is simply
not correct today.
    The Bureau of Labor statistics breaks down the
manufacturing sector into approximately two dozen industries
and this does not include other sectors such as retail,
hospitality or tourism.
    I understand you are no longer using the outdated data when
writing regulations but you are required under this Executive
Order to consider economic effects whenever you are writing a
major rule.
    The EPA is in the process of finalizing the clean power
plant rules and the NOx ozone rules as well, which is predicted
to be one of the most expensive regulations in the EPA's
history.
    I am curious. What economic factors and how updated are
they that you use when you look at any one of these three rules
today? How up to date are your economic numbers? What
guidelines are you using today?
    Ms. McCarthy. I am happy to provide you information on this
but EPA, I believe, does a great job in keeping up with the
economics we need in order to provide the American public a
really good understanding of what the costs and benefits are of
our rules.
    I think we do an excellent job. There is always work going
on and we try to update as much as we can, but I think we are
up to date in what we are doing. I would be happy to share that
information with you.
    Senator Rounds. Would you provide the committee the current
data you are using when you did each of these three rules,
please?
    Ms. McCarthy. Of course. There is something called the
Regulatory Impact Analysis that goes with these rules. All of
the methods, methodologies and data is contained in that.
    Senator Rounds. I hear you say, and we would like to get,
since you are not using the old data, you have updated the
data, the most current data that you have to indicate the
impact on the economy that all three of these rules would have.
    Ms. McCarthy. I will make sure we provide that information
to you, Senator.
    Senator Rounds. Thank you very much. I appreciate it.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Rounds.
    We will leave the record open for 24 hours because there
are things that both Senator Boxer and I want to submit for the
record, questions for the record and also clarifications for
the record.
    Senator Boxer. Mr. Chairman, can I make an inquiry?
    Senator Inhofe. Yes.
    Senator Boxer. I asked if I could have a second round and
you said, no, I could not. I don't ever remember my ever
stopping from a second round. I ask unanimous consent that I
have a second round to make some points at this time.
    Senator Inhofe. I object.
    Senator Boxer. Then I ask unanimous consent that I be
allowed to place documents in the record.
    Senator Inhofe. We have already done that.
    Senator Boxer. No, I want to say what they are. I ask
unanimous consent that Senator Markey's first statement be
submitted to the record.
    Senator Inhofe. Without objection.
    [The referenced information follows:]

           Statement of Hon. Edward J. Markey, U.S. Senator
                    from the State of Massachusetts

    Administrator McCarthy, under your leadership the EPA has
been working on common-sense policies to continue the gains in
clean air, clean water and public health that our country has
made during the last 40 years. Thank you for being here today
to answer questions about how our country can maintain that
progress and continue to move forward.
    Being from Boston, there is no denying that we've had a
weird winter. Arctic air that usually hangs out in Alaska has
instead been in New England. When that cold air meets the
record warm water in the Atlantic, the result is extraordinary
snowfall. Snow that our friends in the western US would love to
have as they look at the small snowpack on their mountains and
wonder where winter went this year.
    These weird winters are what scientists have predicted
would happen as the levels of carbon pollution buildup in our
atmosphere from burning fossil fuels.
    In the United States, power plants are a major producer of
carbon pollution and the EPA is working on standards to reduce
pollution from them. I want to see you finalize the strongest
Clean Power Plan possible. Getting the renewable energy
component of it right will be critical.
    Wind and solar electricity generation has seen
extraordinary growth in the United States in the last decade.
And with that growth, costs have fallen dramatically.
    And once the Clean Power Plan is finalized those cost
savings will continue even as we cut dangerous carbon
pollution.

    Senator Boxer. I ask unanimous consent that the National
Climate Assessment which was voted on by the Senate 100 to 0 be
put in the record that shows that climate change is going to
harm human health.
    Senator Inhofe. Without objection.
    [The referenced information follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Boxer. I have put in the record two documents that
show how climate change is fueling our California drought.
    Senator Inhofe. Without objection.
    [The referenced information follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Boxer. I ask unanimous consent to put in the record
a Washington Post article, The Remote Alaskan Village that
Needs to Be Relocated Due to Climate Change.
    Senator Inhofe. Without objection.
    [The referenced information follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Boxer. I ask unanimous consent to put in the record
the peer-reviewed study that shows warmer temperatures equal
bigger snow storms.
    Senator Inhofe. Without objection.
    [The referenced information follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Boxer. Last, I would ask unanimous consent that I
put in a document that shows that Professor Laurence Tribe was
hired by Peabody Coal, the world's largest privately held coal
company, to write an opinion that criticized the coal rule.
    Senator Inhofe. Without objection.
    [The referenced information follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Boxer. Thank you.
    Senator Inhofe. Without objection, we are adjourned.
    [Whereupon, at 11:04 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]
    [Additional material submitted for the record follows.]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

                                 [all]
