[Senate Hearing 114-243]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]





                                                        S. Hrg. 114-243

                      ECONOMY-WIDE IMPLICATIONS OF
                      PRESIDENT OBAMA'S AIR AGENDA

=======================================================================

                                HEARING

                               before the

                              COMMITTEE ON
                      ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
                          UNITED STATES SENATE

                    ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

                             FIRST SESSION

                               __________

                           SEPTEMBER 29, 2015

                               __________

  Printed for the use of the Committee on Environment and Public Works



[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]





       Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys

                                  ______

                         U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

99-516 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
  For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
  Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
         DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
                          Washington, DC 20402-0001















               COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS

                    ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS
                             FIRST SESSION

                  JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma, Chairman
DAVID VITTER, Louisiana              BARBARA BOXER, California
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming               THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho                    BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas               SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
JEFF SESSIONS, Alabama               JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi            KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND, New York
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska                CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota            EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska

                 Ryan Jackson, Majority Staff Director
               Bettina Poirier, Democratic Staff Director





















                            C O N T E N T S

                              ----------
                                                                   Page

                           SEPTEMBER 29, 2015
                           OPENING STATEMENTS

Inhofe, Hon. James M., U.S. Senator from the State of Oklahoma...     1
Boxer, Hon. Barbara, U.S. Senator from the State of California...     4

                                WITNESS

McCabe Hon. Janet, Acting Assistant Administrator, Office of Air
  and Radiation, United States Environmental Protection Agency...    10
    Prepared statement...........................................    12
Responses to additional questions from:
    Senator Inhofe...............................................    21
    Senator Boxer................................................    37
    Senator Wicker...............................................    38
    Senator Fischer..............................................    41


       ECONOMY-WIDE IMPLICATIONS OF PRESIDENT OBAMA'S AIR AGENDA

                              ----------


                      TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 29, 2015

                                       U.S. Senate,
                 Committee on Environment and Public Works,
                                                    Washington, DC.
    The full committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m. in
room 406, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. James Inhofe
[chairman of the full committee] presiding.
    Present: Senators Inhofe, Boxer, Barrasso, Capito, Wicker,
Fischer, Sullivan, Carper, Whitehouse, Merkley, Gillibrand and
Markey.

            OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES INHOFE,
            U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA

    Senator Inhofe. The meeting will come to order.
    I have shared this with a couple of the members. Some of us
just came up from the Armed Services Committee. There were
seven Republicans on the one side that are members of this
committee and members of the other. So I am going to be asking
the staff to coordinate with all the members on both sides to
find a time other than 10 o'clock on Tuesday. Because I have
given up getting Armed Services to change theirs.
    So we have to very significant, we have the biggest overlap
of any two committees in these two committees. So we are going
to try to correct that.
    Acting Assistant Administrator McCabe, thank you for taking
the time to be here to talk about two of the most expensive and
intrusive Federal regulations ever put forward in the history
of this Country: the National Ambient Air Quality Standard, or
NAAQS, ozone and the recently finalized carbon standards for
power plants. Your agency is attempting to restructure our
entire energy system while simultaneously controlling economic
expansion.
    These regulations would cost hundreds of billions of
dollars, leaving stakeholders with an economic burden that will
take generations to pay down. These regulations stand to impact
every industrial sector and would skyrocket the price of doing
business in this Country, making us non-competitive. These
regulations would reduce the domestic investment in associated
jobs, likely shipping them overseas to countries like China
with less stringent environmental standards.
    I can remember when Lisa Jackson was first appointed to be
the Director of the Environmental Protection Agency. She made
the statement, in response to my question, if we have all these
standards that we are going to meet in this Country, is this
going to have the effect of reducing emissions worldwide. She
said no, because of course, this isn't where the problems is.
The problem is in China, it is in India.
    So I think we recognize now that it could actually,
reductions here could cause our manufacturing base to go to
countries where they don't have any restrictions and it could
have the effect of increasing and not decreasing it.
    Finally, these regulations could cause the most harm to
low-income and minority families, as your agency forces a shift
away from affordable, reliable electricity and limits access to
jobs in the industry, manufacturing and transportation segment.
    This was brought to our attention several times by the
chairman of the Black Chamber of Commerce, talking about the
adverse effect on the very poor and the minorities that this
have. Those individuals who spend a much larger percentage of
their expendable income to take care of things that they have
to have, like heating their homes.
    Overall, the costs and the benefits of these regulations
are minimal at best. The final Clean Power Plan would cost
hundreds of billions of dollars each year, while only reducing
CO2 concentrations by 0.2 percent, global
temperatures by one one-hundredth of a degree Fahrenheit, and
sea level rise by the thickness of two human hairs. EPA's ozone
proposal would cost as much as $1.7 trillion over the life of
the proposal and result in 1.4 million lost jobs.
    Up to 67 percent of the counties, and that is what we are
talking about, when we are talking about ozone counties, as
opposed to States, 67 percent of the counties would fail to
meet the proposed lower standards. That is assuming the raise
that they are talking about is between 65 and 70, I believe. In
my State of Oklahoma, all of our counties, all 77 counties, are
in attainment. If we went down to 65, none of the 77 counties,
all 77 counties would be out of attainment. So it is a very
significant thing personally, to me, and the State of Oklahoma.
    Like many of the EPA's recent proposals, the carbon and
ozone standards would have negligible environmental benefits,
are based on questionable health benefits and come with
unequivocal economic costs. Additionally, they are full of
unreasonable assumptions and projections, including the EPA's
projection that renewable generation would account for 28
percent of electricity production by 2030, when the wind and
solar currently accounts for less than 5 percent. So you see
this is something that very likely could not happen.
    These regulatory actions are based on a dubious science and
an accumulation of improper collusion with extremist
environmental groups and their sue-and-settle tactics. These
regulations face major legal obstacles and wide-reaching State
opposition. For ozone, Colorado Democrats Senator Michael
Bennet and Governor John Hickenlooper have joined Kentucky
Governor Steve Beshear and others in voicing their concerns
about impacts on local economies. Thirty-two States, 32 States
oppose the proposed Clean Power Plan. Opposition is growing
against the final version. It is very telling when you have a
Democrat Senator who is generally supportive of the EPA's
efforts calling the final rule a slap in the face.
    EPA is essentially cutting corners in a shameless attempt
to promote President Obama's environmental legacy. I am eager
to hear why this agency is steamrolling ahead and requesting
billions of taxpayer dollars be spent on proposals that are not
only rejected by the States, which is happening today, but
ignore the will of Congress, rely on unreasonable assumptions,
cost billions and increase the cost of doing business and do
nothing to impact public health and global warming.
    On that happy note, I will recognize Senator Boxer.
    [The prepared statement of Senator Inhofe follows:]

            Statement of Hon. James M. Inhofe, U.S. Senator
                       from the State of Oklahoma

    Acting Assistant Administrator McCabe, thank you for taking
the time to be here. We are here today to talk about two of the
most expensive and intrusive Federal regulations ever put
forward in the history of this country: the National Ambient
Air Quality Standard for Ozone and the recently finalized
carbon standards for power plants. Your agency is attempting to
restructure our entire energy system while simultaneously
controlling economic expansion.
    These regulations would cost hundreds of billions of
dollars leaving stakeholders with an economic burden that will
take generations to pay down. These regulations stand to impact
every industrial sector and would make the price of doing
business in this country more expensive. These regulations
would reduce domestic investment and associated jobs, likely
shipping them overseas to countries like China with less
stringent environmental standards. And finally, these
regulations would cause the most harm to low-income and
minority families as your agency forces a shift away from
affordable, reliable electricity and limits access to jobs in
the energy, manufacturing and transportation sectors.
    For all of these costs, the ``benefits'' of these
regulations are minimal at best. The final Clean Power Plan
would cost hundreds of billions of dollars each year while only
reducing CO2 concentrations by 0.2 percent, global
temperature by1/100th of a degree Fahrenheit and sea level rise
by the thickness of two human hairs. EPA's ozone proposal would
cost as much as $1.7 trillion over the life of the proposal and
result in 1.4 million lost jobs. Up to 67 percent of counties
would fail to meet the proposed lower standards, which means
they would face a legacy of EPA regulatory oversight, stiff
Federal penalties, lost highway dollars, restrictions on
infrastructure investment, and increased costs to businesses.
    Like many of the EPA's recent proposals, the carbon and
ozone standards would have negligible environmental benefits,
are based on questionable health benefits, and come with
unequivocal economic costs. Additionally, they are full of
unreasonable assumptions and projections, including the EPA's
projection that renewable generation would account for 28
percent of electricity production by 2030 when wind and solar
currently account for less than 5 percent, which has taken
decades to achieve and significant Federal subsidization.
    These regulatory actions are based on dubious science and
are the culmination of improper collusion with extremist
environmental groups and their sue-and-settle tactics.
    These regulations face major legal obstacles and wide
reaching State opposition. For ozone, Colorado Democrats
Senator Michael Bennet and Governor John Hickenlooper have
joined Kentucky Governor Steve Beshear and others, in voicing
their concerns about the impacts on local economies. 32 states
opposed the proposed Clean Power Plan and opposition is growing
against the final version. It's very telling when you have a
Democrat Senator who is generally supportive of the EPA's
efforts calling the final rule a ``slap in the face.'' (Senator
Heitkamp's response to the final Clean Power Plan).
    EPA is essentially cutting corners in a shameless attempt
to promote President Obama's environmental legacy. I'm eager to
hear why this Agency is steamrolling ahead and requesting
billions of taxpayer dollars be spent on proposals that are not
only rejected by states, but ignore the will of Congress, rely
on unreasonable assumptions, cost billions, increase the cost
of doing business, and do nothing to impact public health or
global warming.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BARBARA BOXER, U.S. SENATOR FROM THE
                      STATE OF CALIFORNIA

    Senator Boxer. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
    Thanks for today's hearing, where we are going to example
two critically important efforts to protect the health of our
children and our families: a proposed rule to strengthen the
ozone standards and the final standards to reduce carbon
pollution from power plants.
    This week, EPA is expected to issue its final rule to
strengthen the ozone standard. I am hopeful EPA will issue a
strong standard that will protect American children, children
like Jackson Woodward, an eighth-grader, 13 years old, from my
State, Vacaville, California. Jackson, who suffers from asthma,
wrote an opinion piece in the Sacramento Bee, explaining why a
stronger ozone standard is important. This is just the way he
finished his op-ed: ``I would like to continue playing outdoors
and competing at a national level in track and field and cross-
country. Having cleaner air will help me achieve my goals. I
don't want to have to keep telling the EPA to clean up our air.
I just want to be able to breathe.'' It was called A Plea for
Clean Air, May 9th, 2015. I ask unanimous consent to put that
into the record.
    Senator Inhofe. Without objection, so ordered.
    [The referenced information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


    Senator Boxer. I just think that we all agree that this
child who suffers from asthma should be able to live a normal
life. But from some of our rhetoric here it seems like we are
putting other interests ahead of the interests of children like
Jackson. I don't think that is what this committee is for. We
are not a committee to represent polluters. We are a committee
to represent families and fight for families.
    Now, the Clean Air Act requires EPA to set the maximum
level of an air pollutant such as ozone that is safe for us to
breathe. Setting an appropriate standard is crucial. Everyone
has a right to know the air they breathe is safe. As I have
said many times, maybe you have had this happen, I have not had
one constituent come up and tell me the air is too clean, stop
cleaning up the air. They don't say that. On the contrary, they
say, keep on fighting, keep on going. We need clean air, clean
water, we need safe drinking water and the rest.
    So despite what some of my friends on the other side may
claim today, scientists agree that EPA needs to adopt a
stricter standard to protect the health of our people,
especially our children and the elderly. If we can't do that,
what good are we? We have known since 2008 the current ozone
standard does not provide the necessary health safeguards.
    According to a new American Lung Association poll, an
overwhelming majority of voter, 73 percent across every party
line in every area of the Country, supports stricter ozone
standards. So I don't care if one of my colleagues feels
differently, that is his right. Good for him. But the important
thing is to listen to the people, not to each other. Listen to
the people.
    Fifty-two percent of Republicans support strengthening the
ozone standards. So why don't we start listening to the people?
    In addition to its efforts to strengthen ozone standards,
the EPA is working to protect the American people from the
dangers of unchecked climate change. This hearing comes less
than a week after the Pope called on Congress to ``avert the
most serious effects of the environmental deterioration caused
by human activity.'' I hope we will not ignore his call. And
this rule is a test as to whether we will heed his call.
    The Obama administration's Clean Power Plan will help
America lead the way to avert the worst impacts of climate
change, such as sea level rise, dangerous heat waves, economic
disruption. One critical way we can address it is to reduce the
dangerous carbon pollution from the biggest source, power
plants. The Clean Power Plan will reduce pollution from
existing power plants and EPA's New Source Performance
Standards will ensure new power plants apply the best available
technologies moving forward.
    This is a cornerstone of achieving our international
commitments and the announcement President Obama made last week
with the president of China shows that U.S. leadership on
addressing climate change is working. But it won't work if we
are divided here. The American people again overwhelmingly
support action. A Stanford University poll from earlier this
year found that 83 percent of Americans, including 61 percent
of Republicans, say that climate change will be a problem in
the future if nothing is done to reduce carbon pollution. And
74 percent of Americans say the Federal Government should take
action to combat climate change.
    Our committee is really in a place where we can listen to
the American people and move forward. The Clean Power Plan will
save money, because by 2030, the estimates are that American
families will save $85 a year on their electricity bills. My
husband and I put a solar rooftop on our home. And we are
paying about a quarter of what most of the people in the
neighborhood are paying who haven't done this. It works. I feel
it in my pocketbook.
    A huge number of Americans commented on that proposed rule.
And EPA has issued a strong final rule that will reduce carbon
pollution by 32 percent over the next 15 years.
    So I commend EPA for issuing these first-ever carbon
pollution standards for power plants. As I often say, if you
can't breathe, you can't work or go to school. So people who
say, oh, we are going to hurt the economy, just look at the
last Clean Air Act. Look at GDP. Look at employment. It is all
good news story. And I hope we can stop fighting and start
working together.
    I thank you, Mr. Chairman.[The prepared statement of
Senator Boxer follows:]

             Statement of Hon. Barbara Boxer, U.S. Senator
                      from the State of California

    Today's hearing will examine two critically important
efforts to protect the health of our children and families--a
proposed rule to strengthen the ozone standard and the final
standards to reduce carbon pollution from power plants.
    This week, EPA is expected to issue its final rule to
strengthen the ozone standard. I am hopeful that EPA will issue
a strong standard that will protect American children like
Jaxin Woodward, an eighth-grader from Vacaville, California.
Jaxin, who suffers from asthma, wrote an op-ed in the
Sacramento Bee explaining why a stronger ozone standard is so
important:
    ``I would like to continue playing outdoors and competing
at a national level in track and field and cross country.
Having cleaner air will help me to achieve my goals. I don't
want to have to keep telling the EPA to clean up our air. I
just want to be able to breathe.''
    I think we can all agree with that. I ask unanimous consent
to place this op-ed in the record.
    The Clean Air Act requires EPA to set the maximum level of
an air pollutant, such as ozone, that is safe for us to
breathe. Setting an appropriate standard is crucial to
protecting the health of millions of Americans. Everyone has a
right to know that the air they breathe is safe--and science
tells us we need a stronger standard.
    Despite what some of my Republican colleagues may claim
today, scientists overwhelmingly agree that EPA needs to adopt
a stricter standard to protect the health of the American
people, especially our children and the elderly. We have known
since 2008 that the current ozone standard does not provide the
necessary health safeguards.
    According to a new American Lung Association poll, an
overwhelming majority of voters--73 percent--across party lines
and from every region of the country support stricter ozone
standards. The poll found that 52 percent of Republicans
support strengthening the standards.
    In addition to its efforts to strengthen the ozone
standard, EPA is also working to protect the American people
from the dangers of unchecked climate change. This hearing
comes less than a week after Pope Francis called on Congress
``to avert the most serious effects of the environmental
deterioration caused by human activity.'' I hope we will not
ignore this call.
    The Obama administration's Clean Power Plan will help
America lead the way to avert the worst impacts of climate
change--such as sea level rise, dangerous heat waves, and
economic disruption.
    One critical way we can address climate change is by
reducing dangerous carbon pollution from the biggest source--
power plants. The Clean Power Plan will reduce pollution from
existing power plants, and EPA's New Source Performance
Standards will ensure new power plants apply the best available
technologies to limit carbon pollution moving forward.
    This is a cornerstone of achieving our international
commitments to reduce harmful carbon pollution. The
announcement President Obama made last week with President XI
of China shows that US leadership on addressing climate change
is working and that other countries are willing to act.
    The American people overwhelmingly support action. A
Stanford University poll from earlier this year found that 83
percent of Americans, including 61 percent of Republicans, say
that climate change will be a problem in the future if nothing
is done to reduce carbon pollution. And 74 percent of Americans
say the Federal Government should take action to combat climate
change.
    The Clean Power Plan will save consumers money. By 2030,
the EPA estimates American families will save, on average, $85
a year on their electricity bills.
    A huge number of Americans--4.3 million--commented on the
proposed rule for existing power plants, and EPA has issued a
strong final rule that will reduce carbon pollution by 32
percent over the next 15 years.
    I commend EPA for issuing these first ever carbon pollution
standards for power plants, and I look forward to the final
ozone rule fulfilling EPA's obligation under the Clean Air Act
to set a standard that will protect public health.
    I often say, if people can't breathe, they can't go to work
or school. These two rules will cut air pollution--keep kids
healthy and in school, keep people out of the emergency room
and save lives.

    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Boxer.
    Administrator McCabe, you are recognized.

 STATEMENT OF HON. JANET McCABE, ACTING ADMINISTRATOR FOR THE
   OFFICE OF AIR AND RADIATION, UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL
                       PROTECTION AGENCY

    Ms. McCabe. Thank you, Senator, thank you, Senator Boxer,
members of the committee. I am very pleased to be here with you
this morning.
    On August 3d, President Obama and EPA Administrator Gina
McCarthy announced the final Clean Power Plan, a historic and
important step in reducing carbon pollution from power plants
that takes concrete action to address climate change, as well
as final standards limiting carbon pollution from new, modified
and reconstructed power plants, and a proposal for a Federal
plan and model rules that demonstrate clear options for how
States can implement the Clean Power Plan in ways that maximize
flexibility for power plants in achieving their carbon
pollution obligations.
    Shaped by a process of unprecedented outreach and public
engagement that is still ongoing, the final Clean Power Plan is
fair, flexible and designed to strengthen the fast-growing
trend toward cleaner and lower-pollution American energy. It
sets strong but achievable standards for power plants and
reasonable goals for States to meet in cutting the carbon
pollution that is driving climate change, tailored to their
specific mix of sources. It also shows the world that the
United States is committed to leading global efforts to address
climate change.
    The final Clean Power Plan mirrors the way electricity
already moves across the grid. It sets standards that are fair
and consistent across the Country and they are based on what
States and utilities are already doing to reduce CO2
from power plants. It gives States and utilities the time and a
broad range of options they need to adopt strategies that work
for them.
    These features of the final rule, along with tools like
interState trading and emissions averaging, means States and
power plants can achieve the standards while maintaining an
ample and reliable electricity supply and keeping power
affordable. When the Clean Power Plan is fully in place in
2030, carbon pollution from the power sector will be 32 percent
below 2005 levels. The transition to cleaner methods of
generating electricity will better protect Americans from other
harmful pollution, too, meaning we will avoid thousands of
premature deaths and suffer thousands fewer asthma attacks and
hospitalizations in 2030 and every year beyond.
    States and utilities told us they needed more time than the
proposal gave them, and we responded. In the final rule, the
compliance period does not kick in until 2022, rather than
2020. The interim reductions are more gradual. States can
determine their own glide path, and any State can get up to 3
years to submit a State plan.
    We heard the concerns about reliability. We listened and we
consulted with the planning and reliability authorities, with
FERC and with the Department of Energy. The final Clean Power
Plan reflects this input and it includes several elements to
assure that the plan requirements will not compromise system
reliability.
    In addition, to provide an extra incentive for States to
move forward with planned investments, we are creating a clean
energy incentive program that will recognize early progress.
Since issuing the final Clean Power Plan, EPA has continued to
engage with States, territories, tribes, industry groups,
community organizations, health and environmental groups, among
others. To help States and stakeholders understand the plan and
to further support States' efforts to create plans that suit
their needs, EPA has developed a variety of tools and
resources, largely available on our website. We remain
committed to assisting States with the development and
implementation of their plans.
    I also want to mention that the agency, as has been noted,
is in the process of completing another significant air
pollution rule. Because the air we breathe is so important to
our overall health and well-being, the Clean Air Act requires
EPA to review the National Ambient Air Quality Standards every
5 years to make sure that they continue to protect public
health with an adequate margin of safety. Based on the law, a
thorough review of the science, the recommendations of the
agency's independent scientific advisors and the assessment of
EPA's scientists and technical experts, in November, 2014, EPA
proposed to strengthen the ozone standard to within the range
of 65 to 70 parts per billion to better protect Americans'
health and welfare. We invited comments on all aspects of the
proposal, including on alternative levels, and we will issue a
final rule by October 1st.
    We are convinced by both our analyses and our experiences
that both the carbon pollution reduction called for under the
Clean Power Plan and the attainment of the ozone standard will
extend the trajectory of the last 40 years when we cut air
pollution 70 percent across this Country while our economy has
tripled.
    Again, thank you to the committee for inviting me to speak
on the agency's work to implement our Nation's environmental
laws to protect public health and the environment. I look
forward to your questions. Thank you, Senator Inhofe.
    [The prepared statement of Ms. McCabe follows:]



  [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]



    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Madam Director.
    Before we start the clock here, let me make three unanimous
consent requests to be entered into the record at this time.
The first is the Harvard poll of Young Americans, aged 18
through 29, which was just completed. It found that young
Americans are often unsupportive of government measures to
prevent climate change that might harm the economy. Less than
30 percent of young adult Americans agreed with the statement
in a poll that ``government should do more to curb climate
change, even at the expense of economic growth.'' Then it
further quotes the poll, the Harvard University poll, ``Not
only are the newest voters less convinced of climate change. As
a reality, they are also less likely to support government
funding of climate change solutions.''
    The second one that I will ask unanimous consent to be in
the record, this was a good one. This was Bloomberg, right
after the visit of the Pope. And is it good, this good or bad
direction for the church. They go through all these things. For
example, the greatest thing that they are concerned about is
suggesting the Catholic Church do more to harness the energy
and compassion for women, 84 percent of the people believe
that. But last in line, chastising those who deny the human
connection to climate change, only 33 percent think that folks
should be talking about that.
    Last, and this was a good one, Gallup, because Gallup does
this every year. They had a poll, and I can remember when
climate change, at that time before they changed the wording
and put global warming, it was about always in first or second
place. Now of 15 concerns that people have in the most recent
Gallup poll, the very last, number 15 is climate change.
    So I ask unanimous consent that these three polls be made a
part of the record.
    [The referenced information follows:]

   [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]



    Senator Inhofe. Ms. McCabe, in June we heard from
Commissioner Mike McKee from Utah about the challenges
addressing background and transport ozone. This is something
that has been a concern for a long time. I think one thing we
can all agree on is, you can't control what comes into your
State. Maybe what you generate yourself.
    Now, what can a State do to control naturally occurring and
trans-continental ozone, since your agency has a poor track
record in gaining the exceptional events and rural transport?
These exceptions were in the Clean Air Act and the Clean Air
exemption, which I hasten to say that I was one of the original
co-sponsors of the 1990 Clean Air Act exemptions. So I have a
lot of pride in the successes that we have had, huge successes.
    But what can a State do to control these things that fall
into the category of exempt events and rural transport
exceptions built into the Clean Air Act? What can they do? Is
there anything they can do?
    Ms. McCabe. Senator, you are correct, the Clean Air Act
does not hold States responsible for pollution that is not
generated from sources within their borders. And you have
mentioned exceptional events, that is one very clear tool that
is in the Clean Air Act to make sure that we can work with the
States to exclude data that is the result of exceptional
events. In the last few years, we have worked hard with the
States to improve and streamline the process to be able to get
those events documented and approved. And we will continue to
do that.
    Senator Inhofe. So what you are saying is that in the event
it is something that falls into this category that you are not
going to have any kind of a punitive action against States who
are unable to do something that falls into this category, is
that correct?
    Ms. McCabe. That is correct.
    Senator Inhofe. On the power plant rules, it is a little
confusing on how we expect the States to submit their initial
plans by a date certain, and we are talking about September 6th
of 2016. Yet the formal State implementation deadline is 2018.
    I would ask the question, why are you requiring an initial
plan to be submitted by 2016 and is there any chance that in
the event that 2016 comes up and a State is not complying,
prior to the time that 2018 is here that there is going to be a
deadline and there could be Federal action against that? Could
that happen or is that the intent? Why are we having this
initial 2016 deadline?
    Ms. McCabe. The way the final rule laid it out is that
plans are due within 1 year. But we recognize that a lot of
States have processes, not all of them, but many States have
processes that will take longer than 1 year. So we set it up so
that States would have the ability to ask for an extension of
up to 2 years.
    Senator Inhofe. And that could happen, based on their
ability to do something that would be impossible to comply
with?
    Ms. McCabe. Sure. So in order to ask for that extension,
they submit an initial submittal in which they document three
relative and straightforward things.
    Senator Inhofe. I think that is a good thing to have in the
record.
    Now, under your watch, EPA has released several air
regulations to address emissions for power plants. I want to
read some of these. Four hundred 11 coal-fired power plants
totaling 101,000 megawatts generation capacity will close by
the end of 2016 as a result of the rules. Certainly Senator
Capito is fully aware of that. The Mercury Rule will cause
55,000 megawatts of power to go offline and another 46,000
megawatts will close down due to the Clean Power Plan. With
additional pressure from the new ozone requirements, a third
set of power plants will close.
    Has the EPA conducted a cumulative impact analysis to
determine the effect of all these rules cumulatively? We talk
about that a lot. Have they?
    Ms. McCabe. We do.
    Senator Inhofe. And who did that?
    Ms. McCabe. We do talk about it a lot. Respectfully,
Senator, I don't accept your recitation of all of these, the
choices that are made with respect to power plants all being
the result of EPA's rules. There are many things that go into a
power plant's decision about whether it is economical to
continue running that facility. Undoubtedly, environmental
rules are part of that, but there are many, many other factors.
    Senator Inhofe. So you have not put together a cumulative
study about the cumulative effect of these rules? An of these
rules that the EPA is either projecting or has come out with or
has already completed?
    Ms. McCabe. As part of our rulemaking, we do not do that.
Although we take account of changes in the energy system and
the energy mix. In each rule that we do, we keep up to date
with EIA and FERC and other agencies that oversee the power
supply.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you very much. I do think that we are
going to be talking about the cumulative effect up here, even
though the EPA may not see that as advisable.
    Senator Boxer.
    Senator Boxer. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I would like to also
put two polls into the record. The American Lung Association
poll, taken 2 weeks ago, showing 73 percent support stronger
ozone standards; the New York Times Stanford poll, 77 percent
say the Federal Government should be doing a substantial amount
to combat climate change. If I may do that, without objection,
I hope?
    Senator Inhofe. Without objection, so ordered.
    [The referenced information follows:]

   [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


    Senator Boxer. Thank you. I appreciate that, because we now
have dueling polls in the record, and people can decide which
one is right.
    Senator Inhofe. The one from the American Lung Association.
    Senator Boxer. The American Lung Association.
    Senator Inhofe. Yes.
    Senator Boxer. You like that?
    Senator Inhofe. Oh, I like it very much, yes. But also I
like the fact that the Gallup poll is recognized as the
accepted poll, more than a particular group that is looking at
the one issue.
    Senator Boxer. Public support for the Clean Power Plan, and
I know my colleague has named several colleagues and said
several States are unhappy. I have heard and seen tremendous
support in my State and other places for the Clean Power Plan.
So Governors, attorneys general, mayors, even utilities, some
of them support it. So what feedback has EPA gotten from
stakeholders regarding that final Clean Power Plan?
    Ms. McCabe. Thank you, Senator Boxer. You are absolutely
right, that there is certainly a range of views. We have been
spending a lot of time talking with people either in formal
settings or less formal settings, and a lot of time talking
with States. I understand that there are a range of views. But
for the most part, the State officials that we are talking with
are starting to dig into thinking about how they are going to
put their plans together.
    Senator Boxer. And isn't one of the reasons that you have
given them tremendous flexibility, isn't that correct?
    Ms. McCabe. Yes, we have.
    Senator Boxer. Which I admire. Because one size does not
fit all, is that correct?
    Ms. McCabe. That is correct.
    Senator Boxer. Ms. McCabe, smog pollution has many health
impacts, particularly for children and the elderly. I read that
moving op-ed from one of my constituents, 13 years old. Can you
describe the benefits of reducing smog pollution and the costs
of not protecting people against smog pollution? Can you give
me some numbers here on asthma and so on?
    Ms. McCabe. Sure. There are about 23 million people in this
Country that have asthma, Senator, as I understand it. Six
million of those are children, one in 12 children across the
Country has asthma. That is particularly true in certain
vulnerable populations. Children in Puerto Rico, for example,
have quite a high rate of asthma.
    Ozone pollution affects the respiratory system. It can
exacerbate or bring on an asthma attack. It can cause other
respiratory symptoms, even in healthy adults, especially when
they are outdoors and exercising.
    When we bring ozone levels down, we reduce asthma attacks,
we reduce visits to the emergency room, we reduce missed school
days, we reduce missed work days, we reduce the costs that are
associated with it.
    Senator Boxer. I am really glad you said that. Because I
don't think a lot of my friends factor this benefit into their
thinking, and I am very pleased that you have that
documentation.
    Ms. McCabe, over the 40-year history, has been enforcing
the Clean Air Act. I have the list here of the benefits, and I
am just going to tell you what they are. If these are
misstated, would you please let me know?
    Over the last 40 years, since that Clean Air Act, our
national GDP has risen 207 percent. The total benefits of the
Clean Air Act amount to more than 40 times the cost, 40 times
the cost of regulation. For every dollar we spend, we get more
than $40 of benefits in return. That is from a 2010 speech that
was made about the Clean Air Act. Do you agree with those
numbers?
    Ms. McCabe. They sound right, Senator Boxer. I can't swear
to the precise numbers.
    Senator Boxer. OK. I am going to send this to you, and if
you could respond.
    In 2010 alone, this particular source has said reductions
in fine particle pollution and ozone pollution achieved by the
Clean Air Amendments of 1990 avoided more than 160,000
premature deaths, avoided 130,000 heart attacks, prevented
millions of cases of respiratory problems, like acute
bronchitis and asthma attacks, 86,000 hospital admissions,
prevented 13 million lost work days, avoided 3.2 million lost
school days due to respiratory illness and other diseases. The
source was an EPA study, and this was presented by Lisa
Jackson. So if I send this to you, could you see whether or not
there has been any difference in that since that speech?
    Ms. McCabe. Absolutely.
    Senator Boxer. Are you planning on doing another look back?
Because that was 2010. I think it is time we take a look ahead.
When are you going to do that? Do you know?
    Ms. McCabe. I don't have a specific plan for that, Senator.
    Senator Boxer. Well, I hope you will consider it. I will
close with this.
    Ms. McCabe.
    [Remarks off microphone.]
    Senator Boxer. The benefits are not thought about, really.
And if you have a kid who is able to play sports and you don't
have to drag him or her to the emergency room, et cetera, that
is a moral benefit and a financial benefit. My view is that is
EPA's job and it is our job here. That is why I keep stressing
the health benefits, because I think they are overlooked. Thank
you.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Boxer. Senator Wicker?
    Senator Wicker. Thank you very much.
    I have a unanimous consent request, too, before we begin
the questioning. The Center for Regulatory Solutions has issued
a paper by Karen Kerrigan, Five Things You Should Know Before
the Senate EPA Hearing on EPA's Ozone Proposal.
    One of the things that the author mentions is about this
Lung Association poll. They went back and recast the poll and
asked an additional question about costs. Once costs were
factored in, support for the EPA ozone proposal plunged. When
asked if they would be willing to spend $100 per year, roughly
half of the support vanished. And when informed that the study
actually estimated that stricter ozone standards would cost
$830 per year, a majority of voters opposed the EPA's plan
outright.
    Also, I would point out that a number of experts have
weighed in that the additional proposed drop in ozone standards
does not have any effect on asthma, as has been alleged here.
Roger McClellan, past chair of the EPA Clean Air Scientific
Advisory Committee, wrote this: ``The EPA and the environmental
lobby claim a stricter ozone standard is needed to reduce
asthma cases. But these claims rely on a much higher ozone
level from decades ago which we don't experience any more.
Recent history does not support this claim connection. In fact,
for well over a decade, asthma cases have increased by
millions, while ozone concentrations have declined.''
    So Mr. Chairman, I ask for unanimous consent to insert this
paper into the record also.
    Senator Inhofe. Without objection, so ordered.
    [The referenced information follows:]

    [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]



    Senator Wicker. Ms. McCabe, you indicated an unprecedented
outreach effort was made to the stakeholders. I can tell you
that folks at the Mississippi Department of Environmental
Quality didn't notice this unprecedented outreach. They say
there were a couple of internet-based seminars, there were some
rarely held discussions concerning State-specific information.
And they complain that you used regional data to impose
requirements on the States, and did not equip them with
actually the tools to do this.
    So let me ask you, what do you say, can you give me
specific examples of how EPA worked with States? Because my
State director says you didn't. Also, why did you use the
larger geographic regional data rather than State-specific
data? Because the requirement is going to be placed on the
States, not on some regional government.
    Ms. McCabe. Senator, thank you for the question. I am very
sorry to hear the reports from your DEQ, because it is really
hard for me to imagine how any State can say that we did not
make every opportunity available to work with them. I
personally have been involved in dozens and dozens of
conversations and meetings with State officials. And we have
invited, any State that wanted to spend time with us has been
afforded that time. So it is distressing that it would be
reported that way.
    In your second point, let me make clear that in the Clean
Power Plan, we use both regional and State-specific data to
develop the final goals for the States. We looked broadly at
the regions across the Country, especially the three
interconnects, because that is the way the power system
operates, that is the grid on which the utilities operate.
Resources, as we know, our electricity resources are not
confined within State borders. They flow across and among and
between States.
    So in looking to see what opportunities were available to
utilities to manage their assets, and indeed, many utilities
operate in many States, that is the way it made sense to look
at that data, because that is the way the system works.
    When we got to developing each State's specific target
under the Clean Power Plan, that is when we took each State's
specific mix of sources into account and applied our nationally
consistent emission rates for coal and gas plants to each
State's particular mix of sources to get a tailored target for
each State.
    Senator Wicker. Well, let me just say, my 5 minutes is
expired. This is so complicated that it really doesn't lend
itself to a series of 5-minute question and answer periods. I
am going to submit several questions for the record to you,
outlining the objections of these people with a clean air
agenda in the State of Mississippi, who feel basically you have
given them something that cannot work for our State.
    Also, I have questions about one specific power association
in Mississippi that simply would have to double, double its
budget to comply with the solar powered requirements that are
being put on them. I will submit questions for the record. I
think we have a regulation coming at States and consumers that
is going to absolutely explode the cost of power and be
unachievable for people who are trying to work with your agency
to do the right thing.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Wicker. Senator Carper.
    Senator Carper. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
    Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask unanimous consent that an
opening statement be submitted by the record by me.
    Senator Inhofe. Without objection, so ordered.
    [The prepared statement of Senator Carper was not received
at time of print.]
    Senator Carper. Thanks so much.
    I am going to ask a favor, Ms. McCabe. Welcome, you have a
tough job. We appreciate your willingness to take it on. I am
going to ask as a favor if you would submit to Senator Wicker
just an overview of the kind of outreach that the EPA has done
to the folks in Mississippi. I think that would be interesting
and enlightening and appropriate. If you would do that, that
would be great.
    Ms. McCabe. I would be happy to do that.
    Senator Carper. I think we all want a couple of things. We
want cleaner air. We want to have a stronger economy. And we
wanted to involve the States and frankly, the business
community, utilities in this, in an appropriate, thoughtful
way. The other thing I would add is I think most of us want to
do this in a way that where we treat our neighbors the way we
would want to be treated. That is especially important for
Delaware and some others who live around us on the east coast.
    Let me start with a review of the basics of the ozone
rules. I understand that in laymen's terms, this rule is all
about using the latest science to determine what levels of
ozone in the air makes us sick. Is that correct, yes or no?
    Ms. McCabe. That is correct.
    Senator Carper. All right. Over the years, as science has
advanced, we have learned more and more about the human body,
leading us to understand that lower levels of ozone in our air
make us sicker than we once thought. Is that correct, yes or
no?
    Ms. McCabe. That is correct, Senator.
    Senator Carper. The EPA only lowers the ozone health
standard if the agency determines that the current standard is
not protecting public health based on the best science
available, is that correct, yes or no?
    Ms. McCabe. That is correct, Senator.
    Senator Carper. And once a new standard is in place, the
EPA allows, as I understand, each State to find the most
economical way to meet the new standard, is that correct, yes
or no?
    Ms. McCabe. That is correct.
    Senator Carper. In the past years, EPA has tightened the
ozone standard from time to time, and our economy has continued
to grow, is that correct, yes or no?
    Ms. McCabe. That is correct.
    Senator Carper. And finally, it is my understanding that if
EPA picks a standard at the top of the range proposed, that is
70 parts per billion, there are only an estimated nine counties
in the Country, outside of California, that will be in non-
attainment by 2025. I am going to say that again. My
understanding is if EPA picks a standard near the top end of
the range, 70 parts per billion, there would be only an
estimated nine counties in the Country outside of California
that will be in non-attainment by 2025. Is that correct, yes or
no?
    Ms. McCabe. That is what our modeling shows, Senator, that
is correct.
    Senator Carper. All right. I would say to my colleagues, do
you all know how many counties there are in America? I didn't
know. I asked my staff to find it out. There are over 3,000. In
fact, there are over 3,100 counties in America. And what the
science would say to us, if a standard is picked, 70 parts per
billion, by 2025, there are going to be nine counties out of
3,000 across America that are going to be in non-attainment.
Nine counties out of 3,000. Think about that. Doesn't seem like
a whole lot to me.
    We only have three counties in Delaware. And when I was
Governor, we were in non-attainment. Not because of our
pollution but because of pollution by States to the west of us.
I could have shut down the State of Delaware. I could have shut
our economy down when I was Governor. We would still be in non-
attainment, because 90 percent of our air pollution came from
other places.
    And we had to breathe it. We are at the end of America's
tailpipe, us, Maryland, New York and New Jersey, Pennsylvania.
It is not fair. Talk about the Golden Rule, treat other people
the way you wanted to be treated, that is not the way we ought
to treat anybody, including folks in our part of the Country.
    In my opening remarks, which I have entered for the record,
I talked about how an estimated 90 percent of our pollution
comes from out of State. Can you just take a minute or two, Ms.
McCabe, and talk to us about how ozone pollution can travel
across State boundaries and impact the air quality of places
like my home, the first State, of Delaware, and our national
parks that may have few or any emitters of ozone?
    Ms. McCabe. Yes, Senator, that is certainly true. We have
seen that over the years. Air pollution doesn't stop at State
borders. And the northeast corridor, as you have alluded to, is
a classic area where downwind States receive pollution from
upwind States.
    The Clean Air Act has a good neighbor provision in it to
make sure that upwind States take steps to reduce the pollution
that they are sending downwind that are causing or contributing
to air pollution violations and poorer health downwind.
    Senator Carper. Can you take just a second and talk to us
about the impact of international ozone pollution and whether
it should impact the decisionmaking on the ozone health
standard, please?
    Ms. McCabe. The ozone health standard is exactly as you
described it, Senator. It is an information and message to the
American people what level of ozone is safe for public health
in this Country. That is a separate issue from the steps that
everybody needs to take in order to get us there.
    And to the extent that there is internationally transported
air pollution, the United States is involved in research and
activities with other countries to try to make sure that those
countries cleanup their air as well. But there is much that we
contribute to our own poor air quality in this Country, and
steps that we can take in a cost-effective and reasonable way
over time to bring those levels down and improve public health.
    Senator Carper. All right, thanks so much. Thanks, Mr.
Chairman.
    Senator Inhofe. Thanks, Senator Carper. Senator Fischer?
    Senator Fischer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Ms. McCabe, for being here today.
    Under the final Clean Power Plan rule, Nebraska faces a 40
percent reduction in its carbon emissions rate. That is a
significant increase from the proposal that we saw where it was
26 percent reduction. So now Nebraska is categorized as one of
the top biggest losers under this rule.
    You know we are the only 100 percent public power State in
this Country. So when I say that Nebraska is one of the ten
biggest losers, what I really am saying is that the citizens of
Nebraska are ranked among the ten biggest losers under this
rule. It is not some big corporation out there. It is not some
big company out there. It is the citizens of Nebraska who are
going to pay for this. As a result, within hours after the
final rule's release, our AG in the State said that the
overreach of the Federal Government will have serious
consequences by driving up electrical costs for Nebraskans all
across the State.
    There seems to be an underlying theme of uncertainty and
confusion among my State officials and the local stakeholders
as well regarding this rule. Senator Wicker alluded to that in
Mississippi. We face that in Nebraska. Providing consumers with
affordable and reliable energy requires long-term investment
plans.
    But the EPA has indicated it could be 3 months between when
the rule was released in early August to when it appears in the
Federal Register. Our director of the energy department in
Nebraska feels that this really is unacceptable. If it is the
same rule that has been released in August, what is taking so
long to publish it in the Federal Register? I share that
frustration.
    Can you shed some light on why it is taking us so long to
get that published?
    Ms. McCabe. Yes, thank you, Senator. Before I do, I will
respond to the earlier question about Mississippi. But my staff
reminded me that we held two specific calls with the State of
Mississippi----
    Senator Fischer. Don't use my time for Mississippi.
    Ms. McCabe. OK. My apologies. In terms of getting a rule to
the Federal Register, there is a standard set of steps that
happens. The rule was signed on August 3d. We submitted it to
the Federal Register on September 4th. That is actually quicker
than a number of other major rules from EPA. And we put every
effort into getting that submitted just as quickly as possible.
    Senator Fischer. And the language will be the same?
    Ms. McCabe. There is a process of doing corrections like
grammar and typos and that sort of thing, but yes. The
substance of the rule is the same.
    We then work with the Federal Register office as they get
the materials ready to publish and we have been doing that back
and forth in a very routine but from our perspective
expeditious manner.
    Senator Fischer. According to Nebraska Public Power
District, which services 86 of our 93 counties in the State,
the EPA failed to show an emission limitation which is
achievable or adequately demonstrated in the State of Nebraska.
NPPD also stated that achieving a 6 percent efficiency rate for
existing coal plants is virtually impossible and it lacks the
transportation capacity to run its gas-fired generators at 70
percent statewide as mandated by that rule.
    Can you describe some of the calculations that were used
when you set Nebraska's target reduction, particularly in
relation to efficiency and utilization?
    Ms. McCabe. First I want to make clear that there are
absolutely no mandates in the rule. There is no requirement
that any utility do anything specific, nor any State, other
than meet an overall target.
    Ms. Fischer. Nebraska is now 40 percent reduction.
    Ms. McCabe. Every State has an emission reduction target,
Senator. Every State has a goal that in 2030 is lower than the
historical emissions in 2012. Those rates vary depending on the
mix of sources in those States. The way the final rule works is
that every coal plant across the Country has the identical
emission rate. This is the way the New Source Performance
Standards are traditionally set. And every gas plant has the
same rate.
    But within the flexibility allowed under Section 111(d),
and within the flexibility that the interState grid allows,
utilities will be able to trade and average and use resources
that they have access to in order to achieve those reductions.
    Senator Fischer. You say there is no mandate. Doesn't the
Clean Power Plan call for increasing Nebraska's renewable
generation from 4 percent to 11 percent by 2030?
    Ms. McCabe. There are projections that we use in part based
on information that we get from other agencies that study these
things that make projections about increases in renewable
energy across the Country. But there is no specific requirement
that any specific State or utility use a specific percentage of
renewable energy.
    Senator Fischer. So in our States, specifically in
Nebraska, we can continue to build our own balanced portfolio
with renewables at the pace that the people of the State
choose? It doesn't have to be increased from 4 percent to 11
percent?
    Ms. McCabe. We believe that States will be able to design
plans, working with their utilities, to achieve that 2030 goal
and the interim goals in ways that accommodate the kind of
planning that they want to do.
    Senator Fischer. But the goal itself of 11 percent is
mandated by the EPA, is that correct?
    Ms. McCabe. There is no goal of 11 percent renewables for
the State of Nebraska.
    Senator Fischer. I see my time is up. I have some questions
on ozone which I would like to submit to you for the record.
Because we did have a hearing in Nebraska on that.
    Again, I have some concerns about very sparsely populated
counties in my State that will be affected. When we look at the
Ranking Member's State of California, I understand her concerns
there because of the non-attainment and the exclusion and
waivers that are provided to California over, I believe it is a
20-year period. Because those standards cannot be met. Yet we
have very sparsely populated counties in Nebraska with less
than one person per mile where we are going to have to be
meeting those. So we will submit those for the record.
    Thank you, Mr. Chair.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Fischer. Senator Markey?
    Senator Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much.
    The Clean Air Act is one of the most effective public
health laws in American history. The original 1963 version
initiated by President Kennedy and signed into law by President
Johnson empowered the United States Public Health Service to
address air pollution, 6 years before the creation of the EPA.
    The Clean Air Act's success comes from its requirement to
use science to protect public health and welfare. The Clean
Power Plan and the new ozone standard are both cases of the EPA
acting to protect public health and welfare from proven
hazards.
    The scientific community has shown the connection between
ozone and respiratory health problems for decades, and has
called for an ozone standard of 60 parts per billion since
2006. Ground level ozone and smog threaten the health of kids
and other cardiovascular-compromised people. It even has
negative impacts on healthy adults and agriculture and
wildlife. Each time science advisory boards have been asked to
review the latest research on ozone, they find a growing body
of evidence of its health hazards.
    Then we have the Clean Power plan, first big step toward
reducing U.S. carbon pollution. The plan will help protect the
public from the health impacts of climate change and other
pollutants like sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides that will
also be reduced as a result.
    Earlier this summer, the U.K.'s top medical journal, the
Lancet, published a major health study that identified climate
change as the most significant global health threat of the 21st
century and offered up a number of prescriptions of ways to
reduce carbon pollution and shift to cleaner sources of energy.
The Clean Power Plan is one way that we can follow the doctor's
orders. The science is clear about the ozone and it is clear
about carbon pollution. These crucial Clean Air Act measures we
are discussing today will promote health and stimulate our
economy.
    Before the 2008 ozone standard was finalized, we heard that
the standard would cripple the economy. But this was just not
true in Massachusetts. Both air quality and GDP increased, even
as the ozone standard tightened. I am expecting that this trend
will continue in Massachusetts as we work to meet the new ozone
standard.
    Do you believe that other States will also experience
economic growth while solving their pollution problems?
    Ms. McCabe. Senator, we have seen nothing to suggest that
improving air quality doesn't improve the economy as it
improves public health.
    Senator Markey. I look forward to the long-awaited ozone
standard that will improve life and productivity of families
impacted by respiratory health problems. I am concerned,
however, that the standard will stop short of providing the
required productions. A 70 parts per billion standard would
still lead to hundreds of thousands of asthma attacks and
thousands of preventable deaths each year.
    Once the ozone rule is finalized, do you believe that an
adequate margin of safety which is required by the Clean Air
Act will be achieved?
    Ms. McCabe. That is our job, Senator, to recommend and for
the Administrator to make a decision that protects the public
health with an adequate margin of safety. I don't believe she
would sign a rule if she didn't feel that is what she was
signing.
    Senator Markey. Many studies have shown that low-income
individuals have the least ability to protect themselves from
the effects of climate change, including air quality, sea level
rise, flooding, water scarcity, food prices and changing
economies. The Clean Air Plan does include programs for low-
income families. Do you think the plan will have a net benefit
for those poor families?
    Ms. McCabe. We think both the Clean Power Plan and the
ozone standard are particularly important to protect
vulnerable, low-income and other populations that are
particularly affected by these issues.
    Senator Markey. And does the history of the Clean Air Act
environmental regulation show that it does lead to innovation,
that new emissions technologies emerge that solve the problem
at a much less expensive cost that had been anticipated, even
by the experts?
    Ms. McCabe. That is absolutely true, Senator.
    Senator Markey. So we have seen that in the automotive
sector, we have seen it in other sectors and I think it is
highly likely to continue in this sector as well. And to those
who wonder whether or not a goal which is not established for
Nebraska or any other State might be met, let's just look at
the facts. Just in America in 2015 and 2016, we are going to
double the total amount of solar. It is going from 20,000 to
40,000 total installed solar capacity. And why is that? It is
because the price is collapsing.
    The same thing is true on the wind side. We are adding
28,000 new megawatts of wind just in this 2-year period. And
between wind and solar, by the end of 2016, we are going to
have 133,000 megawatts of wind and solar installed in the
United States, largely because of the advance in the technology
and the collapse in price.
    So I think people should be optimistic that each of the
States, with the great flexibility you are providing, will be
able to meet the standard.
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Markey. Senator Capito?
    Senator Capito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Administrator McCabe, for coming. I understand you were in West
Virginia yesterday.
    Ms. McCabe. I was.
    Senator Capito. At the Greenbrier. So I know you found it
great.
    Ms. McCabe. It is absolutely beautiful there, Senator.
    Senator Capito. Thank you. We have had a lot of talk about
costs and benefits. I noticed the gentleman's comments earlier
when he talked about the cost. He didn't talk about the costs
to the lower and middle income of the price of energy.
According to studies under this plan, in our State of West
Virginia, the cost of energy will rise somewhere between 17 and
22 percent. Right now, we have 430,000 low and middle income
people in the State of West Virginia whose pay, take-home pay
is $1,900 a month, they spend 17 percent of their take-home
money to pay for their energy. When this goes up, say, 20
percent, this is going to have a cost to them, a human cost to
them.
    What kind of transparency has EPA brought forward to folks
who live in areas like my areas that will be deeply affect?
What kind of transparency have you actually stated is going to
result in the rise in their energy costs on a daily basis?
    Ms. McCabe. Well, Senator, of course there are a lot of
numbers out there that people are citing.
    Senator Capito. I am asking for EPA numbers.
    Ms. McCabe. I know, but the numbers that you cited are not
EPA numbers. I don't know where they come from.
    Senator Capito. Right. That is why I am asking you.
    Ms. McCabe. We did an analysis as we do for every major
rule where we looked at expected impacts on both the price of
energy and on bills. Because what matters is how much you write
that check for every month. And our analysis is all laid out in
our regulatory impact analysis.
    Senator Capito. What did you find? Just generally.
    Ms. McCabe. We found that by 2030, the average cost of a
person's electric bill would go down by about 7 percent, and
that is as a result of increased energy efficiency that we see
coming into the system. So even though electricity prices might
go up a little bit, bills will actually go down. That is what
our analysis shows.
    Senator Capito. This study is from NERA, respected
consultant and analysis firm. I am sure you are familiar with
them.
    Ms. McCabe. Yes.
    Senator Capito. And I would take exception to if it goes up
a little bit, 20 percent, when you are bringing home $1,900, is
a significant amount.
    My next question is, on your first rule, from the time of
the first rule to the second rule, 22 States saw an increase,
some a major increase. West Virginia went from 20 percent
reduction to 37 percent reduction. Why was that decision made
to make it the hardest hit of those regions that are the energy
exporters, such as West Virginia, Wyoming, Kentucky, North
Dakota?
    Ms. McCabe. So this is all laid out in our discussion,
Senator. It is all based on the data that we had and that we
received during the public comment period and on the design of
the rule, which follows the way the Clean Air Act tell us to do
these rules, which is to set expectations on industry that are
uniform across the Country.
    So all the information that we had showed the different
things that utilities were doing to reduce carbon. And so we
set an expected emission rate for coal plants across the
Country.
    Senator Capito. Yes, which no coal plant in my State meets
that target. Not one.
    Ms. McCabe. But they are not required to meet them
tomorrow. They are required to meet them overall, over the
whole system, and by 2030. Using the types of approaches that
many States are already using and utilities are already using,
that are bringing those CO2 emissions down, we feel
confident that every State will be able to achieve that.
    Senator Capito. Let me ask you this. If the State
implementation plan is not put forward you said they get a 2-
year extension. What happens in 2016 if they put forward their
idea of a State implementation plan? Is there an implementation
of a Federal implementation plan after 2018 if the State
doesn't submit?
    Ms. McCabe. What the Clean Air Act says is that if a State
doesn't put forward a plan under 111(d), then EPA should step
in and do a Federal plan.
    Senator Capito. So that would be in 2018 or 2016?
    Ms. McCabe. It would be when a State fails to meet a
requirement under the rule.
    Senator Capito. So if you don't submit a State plan in
2016, are you subjected to the Federal implementation plan?
    Ms. McCabe. If a State submits this initial plan that the
rule asks for and a request for a 2-year extension, that is
complying with what the rule requires.
    Senator Capito. I know you are well aware that there are
many States that are considering, many Governors are
considering not even submitting a State implementation plan at
all. So are you saying then if they don't submit any kind of
implementation plan in 2016, they would be subject to the
Federal implementation plan?
    Ms. McCabe. Following the requirements of the Clean Air
Act?
    Senator Capito. Yes.
    Ms. McCabe. If a State doesn't submit a plan as required,
that would trigger the obligation for EPA to do a Federal plan.
    Senator Capito. One last question on the ozone rule. We
talk about non-attainment. I am happy to report we are in
attainment in the State of West Virginia. But we are very
rural, as the gentlelady from Nebraska was talking about. So if
we reach a point where we are not in attainment, we have no
offsets to really offer to get ourselves into attainment, where
maybe a more congested area or a larger metropolitan area,
larger manufacturing area would have some offsets to offer.
    Is this something you are considering, how to help rural
areas meet these standards when they are fully implemented?
    Ms. McCabe. Congress actually thought about this, and they
included something called the Rural Transport Area in the Clean
Air Act for areas that truly are rural and where the emissions
creating the high ozone are not from within their county, they
can be designated a Rural Transport Area. That greatly reduces
the expectations on that area.
    Senator Capito. So of the nine counties which are not in
compliance, or let's say, of the other counties that are in
compliance, not the nine that Senator Carper was talking about,
are they considered, some of them, Rural Transport Areas?
    Ms. McCabe. We don't actually, I believe, have any areas
that are so designated now. I actually don't think that we
would be looking at extremely rural areas in West Virginia
under a future ozone standard that is in this range. But the
nine counties that are mentioned, we don't currently have any
Rural Transport Areas, but that tool would be available in the
event that a county that meets those criteria had ozone levels
higher than whatever the standard is.
    Senator Capito. OK, so just so I understand, is the reason
that designation is not used is because all of rural America is
meeting the ozone standard that is set right now? Is that the
reason?
    Ms. McCabe. There are no counties, most rural counties meet
the ozone standard. Let me put it that way. Most rural counties
meet the ozone standard. And for any that could be considered
rural, depending on how you identify that, if they are part of
an ozone non-attainment area, it is because it makes sense for
them to be part of that, that there are emissions that are
contributing to local air quality.
    Senator Capito. OK, I think I get that. Thank you.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Capito. Senator Merkley?
    Senator Merkley. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
    Thank you for your testimony. The report yesterday, the
news report was that based on the commitments that nations are
making the Paris conference in December? The temperature of the
planet would still increase by more than 6 degrees Fahrenheit,
so essentially above the target that has been around, the 3.6
degrees Fahrenheit or 2 degrees Celsius target. Is it the
opinion of the U.S. Government that 6 degrees would be
catastrophic?
    Ms. McCabe. I think that there is a lot of concern about
temperature rise at those levels, Senator.
    Senator Merkley. And much of the conversation has been
about avoiding that, one has to control both carbon dioxide as
an air pollutant and methane as an air pollutant. I applaud the
Administration for trying to control fugitive methane as a
byproduct of drilling for natural gas.
    But essentially, the conversation has been, if you are
going to reduce enough, you have to leave a lot of the
identified fossil fuel reserves that have been identified in
the world in the ground, leave it in the ground, roughly an
estimate of 80 percent of those. Does the Administration share
that perspective?
    Ms. McCabe. I am not familiar enough with that kind of
calculation, Senator, to confirm that or not.
    Senator Merkley. Well, I say that as a framework because
essentially the Clean Power Plan is a subset of our Nation's
efforts to control carbon dioxide, because of this broader
framework of planetary stewardship, which is so important.
    Yesterday Shell announced that they were discontinuing
their plans for drilling in the Arctic. I would like to thank
all those who advocated that drilling the Arctic makes little
sense. Is there a possibility that the United States will use
its chairmanship of the Arctic Council now to encourage the
Arctic Council nations to leave the Arctic off limits?
    Ms. McCabe. Senator, I really can't speak to the position
on the Arctic Council. But I would be happy to take that
question back and get you a response on it.
    Senator Merkley. I would like to encourage the
Administration to do that. There is a window of opportunity
here that is important as part of this worldwide perspective,
leave it in the ground. You can do all you want in terms of the
Clean Power Plan. But if one is opening up additional fossil
fuel reserves to being exploited and burned, it is
counterproductive and the pieces don't fit together.
    One of the conversations has been that the United States
shouldn't necessarily act if it is acting alone. Are we seeing
more engagement by other nations around the world coming to the
table?
    Ms. McCabe. Yes, we are. In fact, when the Clean Power Plan
was proposed, it was the talk of the circles internationally.
There was a lot of attention on the U.S. stepping forward and
putting some concrete action on the table that we think has
been very, very helpful in those international discussions.
    Senator Merkley. I was noting that a lot of times people
say, well, China is not doing anything. But China has committed
to deploying as much renewable energy in the next 15 years
equal to all the electricity generated by the United States
currently, which is sizable. I was struck by the numbers. Their
goal is to go from 33 gigawatts of solar this year to 70
gigawatts 2 years from now, and to go from about a little over
100 gigawatts of wind energy now to 150 gigawatts 2 years from
now. Does this exceed the rate of expansion of the solar and
wind that is occurring in the United States?
    Ms. McCabe. Gosh, I am not sure. But it is significant
growth, and very welcome to see the Chinese commit to this.
    Senator Merkley. They have also announced that they are
launching a cap and trade system nationally in 2017.
Specifically, they had proceeded to do seven pilot projects in
cap and trade, sub-national regional projects. And they are
taking experience from that, the last of those was launched in
2014. So they have seven projects on which to draw information
to launch this national cap and trade system.
    So they are planning to use markets the same way we used
markets to control sulfur dioxide successfully. Are there any
insights in this for the United States?
    Ms. McCabe. That is a very welcome announcement from them.
They have been looking at this and come forward with this plan
and we are very encouraged by it.
    Senator Merkley. It has been commented now that every major
carbon producer has put forward a plan except for India. India
announced that it is going to submit a plan on October 1st
emphasizing renewables. Do you have any advance information you
would like to share with us about what India is going to
announce?
    Ms. McCabe. I don't, actually.
    Senator Merkley. OK. Well, we will look forward to that. I
think it is impressive how many nations have now under this
voluntary framework, we had this shift from trying to go from
an international treaty in which there were mandatory
reductions to asking each nation to put their best foot
forward. It seems like nation after nation is saying that yes,
as part of the global community, we have to take on a
significant role in global stewardship.
    Ms. McCabe. It is very encouraging, and I think you are
right, that there is that sense that people are taking
responsibility for this and realizing that we have to take
responsibility.
    Senator Merkley. It is in that context that the U.S. should
not only do its part but be a leader in the stewardship of the
planet and basically saving us from ourselves. Thank you so
much for your role in that.
    Ms. McCabe. Thank you, Senator.
    Senator Inhofe. I am going to make an observation, of
course, I would welcome Senator Boxer to make one too, in
fairness. Right now there is a hearing going on that we are
missing in the Armed Services Committee. The whole hearing is
about how China, what they are doing to us in cybersecurity,
how they haven't kept their word on any of this stuff, and now
we are lauding the virtues of China, who is making all these
commitments on what they are going to do. It is kind of
interesting. What do you think, Senator Boxer?
    Senator Boxer. Well, I don't trust China. On the other
hand, that is not my statement. On the other hand, the people
on your side of the aisle have said, do nothing until China
pledges to do something. And China pledges to do something and
you are the same old Johnny One Note here.
    So the bottom line is, I don't trust China and I don't
trust them with the safety of the world and the planet.
Therefore it is imperative that regardless of what China says
or does that America, as the Pope said, not walk away from our
responsibility. I am frankly shocked that the other side of the
aisle thinks that we should give up our leadership until China
and India step up. That has been your call.
    So now they say they are going to step up and now you say,
well, we can believe them. Whether they step up or not, it's
God's planet, we have to protect it. I am tired of ducking
behind the skirts of China. Let's step out and show what
America is made of, which is true grit and the can-do attitude.
    I just want to close with saying this. My State, which has
taken the lead, is going gangbusters here. We are doing
absolutely great. And I am very excited about it. I think if
you cling to the dirty old energies of the past, you are domed
in this world. Because the people are not going to support
dirty energy when they see what it is doing to the planet, to
their lungs, to their families, to the economy.
    I wish that we could get out from under China's skirts. I
am glad they said what they did. I don't trust them. I would
rather they said they were going to do something. They said
they were going to build a high-speed rail and they did it. So
maybe they will do it.
    But whether they do it or not, America should lead.
    Senator Inhofe. OK, we should all trust China.
    Senator Boxer. Don't change my words. I said don't trust
them. Regardless of whether they are going to do this, we
should take the lead. It is our moral responsibility.
    Senator Inhofe. Senator Merkley?
    Senator Merkley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The point has
often been made here in this room that the U.S. acting alone
will not have an impact or save us from global warming gases
and global warming that results from that. This isn't about
trusting any one particular nation, but it is about observing
that nations are making, other nations are making substantial
commitments. It isn't just into the future, we can see what has
happened the last few years. China has had a dramatic increase
in its renewable energy in the past few years. So it is on this
trajectory that it has currently laid out.
    They also have enormous internal motivation to continue,
because of the tremendous air pollution in that Country. They
are worried about the citizens rebelling against the government
because of that air pollution. It is a national security issue
for them and an internal security issue as well.
    So not only is it becoming very economical in wind and
solar as compared to fossil, but there is also a huge stability
issue that is driving the government's motivation.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Merkley. I will know
better next time.
    [Laughter.]
    Senator Inhofe. Senator Sullivan?
    Senator Sullivan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just feel a
little bit compelled, I wasn't going to mention anything, but
since Senator Merkley brought it up, there are a lot of
Senators who don't think that was a good day yesterday in
Alaska with what Shell decided to do. I think our regulatory
system is largely to blame. Seven years, $7 billion to try to
drill one well in America. The EPA certainly shares some of the
blame. We are going to undermine our energy security, certainly
undermine jobs that people need in this Country.
    But one issue that doesn't come up, we are going to
undermine the environmental protection in the Arctic. What are
we doing? We are driving investment to Russia, to China, to
countries that don't have high standards like we do. SO I think
when we are celebrating this, we need to actually have a better
understanding of the environment. I certainly will oppose any
maneuver by the Arctic Council to try to limit responsible
resource development in the Arctic.
    Administrator McCabe, I want to talk, Senator Carper
mentioned the importance of clean air, a strong economy, I
agree with that. But I also think we should all be very
concerned about making sure your agency follows the directions
of Congress, follows the rule of law. Do you think that any
statutory, or any action that you take from a regulatory
standpoint has to be based in statute?
    Ms. McCabe. Our regulatory actions are based in our
statutory authorities, Senator.
    Senator Sullivan. Good. I am glad you think that.
    In terms of the Clean Air Act, you have actually lost a
couple of pretty important Supreme Court cases recently, the
Utility Air Regulator case, the Michigan v. EPA case. In the
Utility Air Regulator case, the Supreme Court stated, ``When an
agency claims to discover a long-extant statute and unheralded
power to regulate a significant portion of the American
economy, we typically greet that announcement with a measure of
skepticism.'' They went on to say ``The EPA's interpretation is
unreasonable because it would bring about an enormous
transformative expansion of the EPA's regulatory authority
without clear congressional authorization.''
    Do you think you have clear congressional authorization to
undertake this rule?
    Ms. McCabe. We do, and our authority has been supported by
the Supreme Court finding that carbon pollution endangers
public health.
    Senator Sullivan. So when you were getting ready to issue
the WOTUS rule, I asked the Administrator if we could get the
legal opinion that EPA undertook to show that you have that
authority. She never granted it, never gave it to me. I think
that is a clear aspect of our oversight, she refused to do it.
Do you have a legal opinion? I am not talking about your rule,
but a detailed legal opinion that shows that you have the legal
authority to issue the Clean Power rule?
    Ms. McCabe. We do, Senator.
    Senator Sullivan. Can we get that?
    Ms. McCabe. We have a legal memorandum.
    Senator Sullivan. Can we get that?
    Ms. McCabe. Absolutely. It is available right now, today,
it has been available since August 3d in the docket. We will be
happy to provide it to you.
    Senator Sullivan. Great. In the Michigan v. EPA case, the
Supreme Court ruled against EPA's Mercury Rules 3 years after
their issuance. As such, many power plants had already
shuttered or retrofitted because of the rule's requirement.
    Earlier this year, the Wall Street Journal ran an editorial
suggesting that this might be a tactic of the EPA.
Interestingly, Administrator McCarthy kind of insinuated that
as well. She was on a TV show and she stated on the eve of this
ruling, ``We think we are going to win because we did a great
job.'' This is EPA v. Michigan, which you actually lost. ``But
even if we don't win, it was 3 years ago we issued the rule.
Most of them are already in compliance, investments have
already been made.''
    Do you think that is an arrogant way to approach the rule
of law in our oversight, saying, hey, even if we lose, we are
going to win because we forced this on Americans anyway?
    Ms. McCabe. Senator, this agency acts within its
understanding of the law.
    Senator Sullivan. What do you think of her statement? What
do you think of that statement? Do you think that is an
arrogant approach to our oversight or the American people? We
lost, but you know what? The American people and businesses are
going to have to abide by it anyway?
    Ms. McCabe. If I can clarify, Senator, the decision from
the Supreme Court spoke to one very narrow aspect of the
Mercury and Air Toxics Rule.
    Senator Sullivan. No, I am talking about her statement.
    Ms. McCabe. I understand that, and I am not going to
comment about the Administrator. I didn't hear her say it, I
don't know what she was intending to say.
    Senator Sullivan. Mr. Chairman, I think that is an
incredibly arrogant way to look at the rule of law, to look at
our oversight of this committee. I think it is something we
need to look at, because it is a flagrant disregard for the
rule of law.
    Let me ask one final question. You talk about outreach.
Thirty-one States, including Alaska, are suing EPA on the WOTUS
rule. You are losing right now in Federal court. There has been
an injunction saying it is like that you are going to lose.
Thirty-two States have opposed the Clean Power Plan.
    Does this disturb you? You talk about all the outreach that
you do, and yet the majority of the States in the United States
consistently oppose what the EPA tries to do from a regulatory
standpoint. Does it disturb you that 31 States are suing on
WOTUS, 32 are opposing the Clean Power plan, and 16 have
already requested a regulatory stay but they can't do it
because you haven't issued the rule? Does that disturb you or
the Administrator?
    Ms. McCabe. Senator, I can't speak to the WOTUS rule,
because that is not within my area.
    Senator Sullivan. But you are a senior EPA administrator.
    Ms. McCabe. I am. And our desire always is to work with
States. There will always be disagreements among States. Even
within the States that have taken action to litigate against
the rule or have indicated that they intend to, we are having
very constructive discussions with those States.
    I think it is oversimplifying to say that X number of
States oppose the Clean Power Plan.
    Senator Sullivan. When the States sue you, that is usually
a pretty good indication they don't like the rule.
    Ms. McCabe. I don't think 32 States have sued us.
    Senator Sullivan. They can't sue you yet on this one,
because you haven't issued the rule.
    Ms. McCabe. And attorneys general are taking certain
positions, Governors are taking certain positions. But the vast
majority of the people that I talk to understand, they
appreciate the adjustments that we made in the final rule that
were directly responsive to the concerns that they raised to
us, like providing more time for States to get their plans, and
providing more time for utilities to accomplish these goals.
    Senator Sullivan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do think it is
a big issue, whether it is the arrogance that the Administrator
shows by saying that, hey, even if we lose, we win, because the
American people are stuck with it anyway. I think it is a
really big issue that we need to look at to not allow for
agencies, even when they lose in court, in the Supreme Court,
to still force a rule down the American people's through and
have the Administrator essentially say that is part of her
strategy, in public. I think it is outrageous.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Sullivan.
    Senator Whitehouse.
    Senator Whitehouse. Thank you, Chairman.
    During this hearing, my colleagues have mentioned this
report prepared for the National Association of Manufacturers
that claimed that a standard of 65 parts per billion could cost
as much as $140 billion per year. EPA had estimated that it
would cost a fraction of what NAM estimates, less than 12
percent.
    The economic consulting firm SYNAPSE recently analyzed the
NAM report and found that, ``grossly overstates compliance
costs, due to major flaws, math errors and unfounded
assumptions. Among other things, NAM significantly inflated the
emissions reductions needed to meet the 65 parts per billion
standard through a series of unfounded and skewed assumptions.
These assumptions and other flaws led NAM to overState
compliance costs by more than 700 percent.''
    That is the document that my colleagues are relying on in
this hearing. I ask unanimous consent that the debunking
industry claims report be entered into the record.
    Senator Inhofe. Without objection.
    [The referenced information follows:]


    [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


    Senator Whitehouse. Industry has a long history of muddling
the science and manufacturing false data and exaggerating
regulatory costs whenever the development of a new public
health standard emerges. It is a standard industry game plan.
We have seen this with climate change denial, we have seen it
with efforts to address acid rain. We have seen it with efforts
to cut toxic pollutants, such as mercury, and we have seen it
with efforts to reduce smog. I am sorry that the National
Association of Manufactures has associated itself with this
unfortunate history and this particular report.
    Ms. McCabe, you have decades of experience working on Clean
Air Act regulations. What is the track record of industry's
past claims about the cost of health standards adopted under
the Clean Air Act?
    Ms. McCabe. I would say, Senator, that we have often heard
on the eve of a regulatory change that there would be
significant economic impacts, and over time of course, we have
seen that has not been true. Air quality has improved, public
health has improved and the economy has also improved.
    Senator Whitehouse. Industry frequently talks about the
costs of a rule. And when they measure the rule, they talk
exclusively about the cost to themselves, the cost to polluters
of meeting the public health standards, while they ignore the
costs of not meeting the health standards that everybody else
has to pay for. They ignore the public benefit and only the
cost.
    Now, EPA estimates the economic benefits from reducing
premature deaths, asthma attacks, heart attacks and missed
school days as high as $42.1 billion a year in 2025,
significantly outweighing the costs. Does this NAM report
quantify any, any of the societal benefits from updating the
standard?
    Ms. McCabe. I don't believe it does. I think it focuses
entirely on costs.
    Senator Whitehouse. Do you agree that we should actually
look at both sides of the ledger, the costs and the benefits
together, in evaluating the merits of a rule?
    Ms. McCabe. Absolutely, we should.
    In fact, if you were an accountant and if you looked at
only one side of the ledger and made a report on it, you would
probably end up going to jail, wouldn't you?
    Ms. McCabe. Me personally?
    Senator Whitehouse. No, the accountant who reported only
one side of the ledger.
    Ms. McCabe. That would probably not be a good way to do
accounting.
    Senator Whitehouse. And yet is the way that industry
constantly behaves in this hearing room.
    We are a downwind State, Ms. McCabe. It is our oceans that
are acidifying because of carbon dioxide. It is our coasts that
are threatened by worsened storms. It is our fisheries that are
moving away in order to seek the shelter of cooler waters to
the north. It is our air that is affected by the ozone.
    Rhode Island from time to time has bad air days on a
perfectly nice summer day, where elderly people and infants and
people with breathing difficulties are advised to stay indoors.
Don't go outside and play football, don't go to the beach, stay
indoors, so that people in other States, upwind of us, can
continue to pollute.
    There is zero concern from the other side of the aisle
about what any of that is costing. It is really astounding to
me. Stage right of this hearing room, every time, every
regulation, every member, always with industry, always against
the environment. And I wish it would come to an end. We are
really in a better place if we can work together to address
real problems rather than pretend they don't exist.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Whitehouse. Senator
Barrasso?
    Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and it does
seem, looking at a map of the places in non-attainment, that it
is California where a lot of that area is in non-attainment. So
if the Senator from Rhode Island states that things are moving
from west to east, we can see the source of significant amounts
of the problems.
    Senator Whitehouse. That is actually not correct.
    Senator Barrasso. Well, there are significant amounts of
California that are not in attainment, if you look at a map
that I looked at a few minutes ago.
    Senator Whitehouse. But if you look at what is coming over
Rhode Island----
    Senator Inhofe. Senator Whitehouse, we are not going to
interrupt each other.
    Senator Whitehouse. I am sorry, but when he mentioned me
specifically I thought it gave me a right to respond.
    Senator Inhofe. Senator Barrasso.
    Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Ms. McCabe, I want to followup with some lines of
questioning that I had with you on February 11th at the hearing
on the President's Clean Power Plan before this committee. I
had asked you about the EPA's claiming of co-benefits of
reduction, sort of the double-counting that I believe is going
on at the EPA. I asked if the EPA was double-counting health
benefits, because it sure seems that way to me, in terms of
reductions in particulate matter, since other EPA air rules
claim the same reductions in particulate matter, claim the same
health benefits.
    My point was, you can only reduce the dust once and accrue
the health benefits of that reduction once, not over and over
again to justify different rules. You stated that you were not
double-counting, and you say we are very careful in all our
regulations to make sure that we don't do this.
    Yet when you take a look at the EPA's own documents, you
State that you are counting co-benefits of reducing the same PM
2.5 in other rules before a 111(d) rule for existing power
plants was even released. EPA stated in its regulatory impact
analysis for the proposed rule for existing power plants that
it was possible that the benefits estimated in this RIA, the
regulatory impact analysis, may account for the same air
quality improvements as estimated in the illustrative NAAQS
regulatory impact analysis. The same air quality improvements.
    That is what the EPA is saying, that the same air quality
improvements from previous regulatory impact analyses are being
counted again. To me that means double-counting.
    So do you still stand by your testimony in front of this
committee and reject your own agency's statement about double-
counting the same co-benefits and reductions of air pollutants
like particulate matter?
    Ms. McCabe. Well, Senator, I am not sure exactly what you
are referring to. But I assure you again that when we do each
regulatory impact analysis, we acknowledge the effects of
previous rules. But the benefits that we associate with each
regulatory action are the benefits that accrue entirely and
exclusively because of that regulatory action. They may then be
additive, on top of prior rules that have come before.
    Senator Barrasso. That is not what the documentation said
that was sent to me. This sounds like Volkswagen accounting. I
think government ought to be held to a much better standard
than what we are seeing coming from this agency and this
Administration.
    According to the Wyoming Department of Environmental
Quality, the EPA designated all of one of the counties in
Wyoming, Sublet County, portions of Lincoln and Sweetwater
Counties, as ozone non-attainment areas in 2012. Judge Gary
Moore, President of the National Association of Regional
Councils, testified at a June 3d hearing, said ``Sublet County,
Wyoming serves as an example of how the new standard,'' he is
referring to the new ozone standard, ``could impact economic
development activities.''
    He goes through Sublet County, the number of residents that
live there, all of the public land that is involved, a county
highly dependent on oil and gas development, mining activities.
``And if the ozone standard is tightened further,'' he says,
``Sublet County will likely be classified as fully in non-
attainment, severe restrictions on industrial development which
will limit jobs in the community.''
    So under your new ozone rule, it is likely that more
counties in Wyoming, more counties around the Country will be
in non-attainment, including the counties that have not yet
achieved the previous level for ozone. So given the high cost
in terms of jobs, regulatory burdens on struggling counties,
the significant detrimental health impacts to people who lose
their jobs, chronically unemployed, under what rationale do you
believe you should be moving the goalpost on counties that have
not yet even met the current standard?
    Ms. McCabe. Well, Senator, there is a lot in that question.
I will try to answer a number of those issues.
    In Sublet County, there are increasing levels of ozone
there that are occurring that are affecting the public health
there. So that prompts the EPA to look at that county and work
with the State there in order to address those issues. I want
to make clear that under any new ozone standard, decisions
about which counties do and don't attain will be made based on
air quality, some of which hasn't happened yet, it will be
based on future air quality, 2014 through 2016.
    So looking at historic levels is not a predictor of which
counties will and won't be in non-attainment. I can tell you
that with Wyoming in particular, we are working very closely
with Wyoming on the emissions related to the oil and gas
activities. Wyoming is a leader in terms of its State programs
to encourage and require the companies there to conduct their
activities in a way that is safe and that minimizes air
emissions in a cost-effective and very positive way.
    Senator Barrasso. Since you bring up the State, in a
February 11th hearing, this will be my final question, Mr.
Chairman, I asked of you if the States had the same access to
crafting the Clean Power Plan rules as the environmental groups
do, given the headlines about the NRDC's involvement in
crafting your rules in the EPA. You stated ``I speak with
States all the time, they have very good access.'' Well, you
didn't really answer the question if the States were getting
the same or better access than the environmental groups.
    So States are going to disagree with you, you say you talk
to States all the time and they have access. Our own Department
of Environmental Quality came and testified about what is
happening. He says, ``In the air programs alone, there have
been dozens of new rules in the regulation of air quality.
Therefore, EPA relies heavily on the states to carry out these
initiatives. We are the boots on the ground that ensures the
Nation's priority is cleaning up the air, protecting human
health is achieved. But State resources are being stretched
even more, as EPA continues to propose regulations at their
current pace, they must consider the ability of States to meet
this demand.''
    That doesn't to me sound like States are really getting
heard in the process as you develop rules and work with the
environmental extremist groups to develop those rules.
    Ms. McCabe. Senator, we work with all groups, and they
provide their input to us. We write the rules that we think are
appropriate. I assure you that in my job, the States are my co-
regulators, are our co-regulators. We take their input
extremely seriously, as together we implement the National
Clean Air Act.
    Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Barrasso. Senator
Gillibrand.
    Senator Gillibrand. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    It is regrettable that this committee is meeting again to
debate the Obama administration's efforts to address climate
change and protect the air we breathe from harmful pollution,
including smog. Just last week, Pope Francis called on us in
Congress to be courageous in protecting our environment and
protecting the most vulnerable among us.
    It is often the most vulnerable who suffer the effects of
poor air quality the most, children, the elderly and people
with illnesses and disabilities. According to the most recent
statistics, 7.9 percent of children in New York, approximately
315,000, live with asthma. The total cost of asthma
hospitalizations in New York is $660 million. That is just New
York.
    When talking about the cost of action, we must also talk
about the cost of inaction, which is often borne by those who
can least afford to pay. Protecting our environment and growing
our economy is not a zero sum game. We should stop treating it
as such. In transitioning to a clean energy economy, we can
unlock the potential for innovation and create new, sustainable
jobs.
    In New York, we are seeing the benefits already through the
participation of the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative, or
RGGI. By participating in this market-based program, New York
has reduced its carbon emissions form power plants by 45
percent since 2005. At the same time, New York's economy is
growing. Our employment is the highest it has been at more than
9 million jobs.
    Can you discuss the costs to the economy in terms of paying
for natural disasters, damage to infrastructure, and increased
resiliency measures if we fail to reduce our carbon emissions?
    Ms. McCabe. Yes, I can, Senator. In fact, EPA in the
spring, late spring or summer, put out a report exactly on that
issue called the SERA report, which looked at a number of
different metrics, and looked at the cost to our economy and to
our society for infrastructure issues in the future and water
quality issues in the future, and sort of compared how much
more it would cost if we didn't take action on climate change.
    So on a number of different metrics, it is very clear and
documented. We would be glad to provide you a copy if you
haven't seen it.
    Senator Gillibrand. Thank you. And who are the most
vulnerable to experiencing the effects of ozone pollution, if
we fail to act?
    Ms. McCabe. In terms of ozone pollution, those who are the
most vulnerable are children, the elderly and those whose
respiratory systems are already compromised through some kind
of respiratory disease.
    Senator Gillibrand. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Gillibrand.
    And thank you very much, Ms. McCabe, for your
participation. We are adjourned.
    [Whereupon, at 11:38 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

                                 [all]




