[Senate Hearing 114-22]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]



                                                        S. Hrg. 114-22

                     STATE REGULATORS' PERSPECTIVES
                        ON THE CLEAN POWER PLANT

=======================================================================

                                HEARING

                               BEFORE THE

                              COMMITTEE ON
                      ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
                          UNITED STATES SENATE

                    ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

                             FIRST SESSION

                               __________

                             MARCH 11, 2015

                               __________

  Printed for the use of the Committee on Environment and Public Works


  [GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]



       Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gpo.gov

                               __________


                        U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
94-981 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2015

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,

http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer
Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202ï¿½09512ï¿½091800, or
866ï¿½09512ï¿½091800 (toll-free). E-mail, gpo@custhelp.com.






               COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS

                    ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS
                             FIRST SESSION

                  JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma, Chairman
DAVID VITTER, Louisiana              BARBARA BOXER, California
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming               THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho                    BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas               SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
JEFF SESSIONS, Alabama               JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi            KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND, New York
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska                CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota            EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska

                 Ryan Jackson, Majority Staff Director
               Bettina Poirier, Democratic Staff Director
                            C O N T E N T S

                              ----------
                                                                   Page

                             MARCH 11, 2015
                           OPENING STATEMENTS

Inhofe, Hon. James M., U.S. Senator from the State of Oklahoma...     1
Boxer, Hon. Barbara, U.S. Senator from the State of California...     3

                               WITNESSES

Myers, Michael J., Chief, Affirmative Litigation Section,
  Environmental Protection Bureau, New York State Attorney
  General........................................................     6
    Prepared statement...........................................     8
    Responses to additional questions from Senator Inhofe and
      Senator Boxer..............................................    20
Nichols, Mary D., Chairman, California Air Resources Board.......    26
    Prepared statement...........................................    28
    Responses to additional questions from Senator Boxer.........    33
    Responses to additional questions from Senator Sessions......    38
Easterly, Thomas, Commissioner, Indiana Department of
  Environmental Management.......................................    41
    Prepared statement...........................................    43
    Responses to additional questions from Senator Boxer.........    88
Parfitt, Todd, Director, Wyoming Department of Environmental
  Quality........................................................    91
    Prepared statement...........................................    93
    Responses to additional questions from Senator Boxer.........    99
Nowak, Ellen, Commissioner, Public Service Commission of
  Wisconsin......................................................   101
    Prepared statement...........................................   103
    Responses to additional questions from Senator Boxer.........   107

                          ADDITIONAL MATERIAL

Letter from Nature Geoscience; Ocean access to a cavity beneath
  Totton Glacier in East Antarctica..............................   192
Articles:
    NASA; NOAA find 2014 Warmest Year in Modern Record...........   197
    Washington Post; The melting of Antarctica was already really
      bad. It just got worse.....................................   200


        State Regulators' Perspectives on the Clean Power Plant

                              ----------


                       WEDNESDAY, MARCH 11, 2015

                                       U.S. Senate,
                 Committee on Environment and Public Works,
                                                    Washington, DC.
    The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m. in room
406, Dirksen Senate Building, Hon. James Inhofe (chairman of
the committee) presiding.
    Present: Senators Inhofe, Boxer, Barrasso, Capito, Crapo,
Boozman, Sessions, Fischer, Rounds, Carper, Whitehouse,
Merkley, Gillibrand, Markey.

            OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES INHOFE,
            U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA

    Senator Inhofe. We will bring this hearing to order.
    It is great to have the panel. I had a chance to meet each
one of you. I really do think that the most important thing,
when we get into these rules and regulations is the State
perspective. Because they are the ones who have to carry these
things out, have to pay for all this stuff.
    So we are here today with State officials on the CO2
regulations for existing power plants. Existing. The Clean
Power Plan is unprecedented in the scope, complexity and
requirements it will impose on State governments. That is what
you guys are going to have to carry out.
    The proposal undermines the longstanding concept of
cooperative federalism under the Clean Air Act, where the
Federal Government is meant to work in partnership with the
States to achieve the underlying goals. Instead, this rule
forces States to redesign the ways they generate, manage and
use electricity in a manner that satisfies President Obama's
extreme climate agenda.
    To date, we have 32 States who have opposed this rule.
There is the chart. There are 32 States that oppose the rule.
Twelve States, including my State of Oklahoma, are suing the
agency over a lack of authority to promulgate the proposal.
Nine States have passed resolutions in their legislatures that
express limits to the proposal's application. Five States have
passed laws that would limit the proposal's application.
    Had the EPA engaged in a meaningful dialog with all these
States, the agency would not be rushing ahead to impose such an
unfair and unworkable and likely illegal regulation.
    While the EPA is busy selling this as a plan to save the
world from global warming, we know that this rule will have
minuscule impacts on the environment. In fact, last week during
the EPA budget hearing, Administrator McCarthy admitted that
the agency has yet to do any modeling that would measure the
proposal's impact on temperatures and sea level rise. There is
a reason for that. And the reason for that is that NERA, which
is a very highly respected group on economic modeling and
analysis, used EPA's models and numbers and found that after
spending $479 billion over a 15-year period, we would see the
double digit electricity prices increase in 43 States, reduce
grid reliability, resulting in voltage collapse and cascading
outages. However, the Clean Power Plan will reduce
CO2 concentrates by less than 0.5 percent, global
average temperature rise will be reduced by only 0.016 degrees
Fahrenheit, and sea level rise would be reduced by 0.3
millimeters, which is the thickness of three sheets of paper.
    Further, any perceived benefits will be rendered pointless
by the continued emissions growth in India and China. Hold that
up higher, that is a good chart there. You can see the
problems. This is the whole point that Administrator Jackson
was talking about, what we do unilaterally here in the United
States isn't going to have that much effect. It doesn't affect
other countries.
    These results, or lack thereof, show that this rule is not
about protecting the environment or saving lives of the local
citizenry. This proposal is about expanding the government's
control into every aspect of American lives. As MIT climate
scientist Richard Lindzen, and Richard Lindzen is noted to be
one of the foremost climatologists in the Country, he said,
``Controlling carbon is a bureaucrat's dream. If you control
carbon, you control life.''
    EPA's rushed timeline, impractical assumptions and
arbitrary mandates pay no mind to the fact that this will be
damaging to State economies and local residents. Their
proposals are nothing more than a blatant and selfish power
grab.
    We have been through these arguments multiple times before,
most recently when the President failed to garner enough
support for cap and trade under a Democrat-controlled House and
Senate. We are talking about back when Nancy Pelosi was a
majority, so they had the White House and the House and the
Senate. They couldn't get a majority vote in order to support
this.
    So I appreciate very much all of the people coming so we
can hear the voices from the States. It is nice of you to take
the time to be here.
    Senator Boxer.
    [The prepared statement of Senator Inhofe follows:]

            Statement of Hon. James M. Inhofe, U.S. Senator
                       from the State of Oklahoma

    TSCA (Toxic Substances Control Act) is a law that everyone
agrees is outdated and in serious need of modernization. I am
very pleased that today we have before us a bill with the
strong bipartisan support of 9 Democrats and 9 Republicans.--I
am proud cosponsor of this bill and hope to move it through
Committee by way of constructive and orderly process.
    For years Senator Lautenberg worked to update the 1976 law,
releasing bill after bill every Congress, and in 2012, he came
to me with a clear message: this law will not be updated
without bipartisan support and input from all stakeholders.
Frank and I held a series of stakeholder meetings, and though
that process we got a lot of good information on all sides of
the issue and I would in particular welcome Ms. Bonnie
Lautenberg to the committee this morning.
    Just about 2 years ago, Senator Lautenberg teamed up with
Senator Vitter to introduce a bipartisan bill that created not
only the first real momentum for meaningful reform, but a
foundation for the legislation we have before the Committee
today.
    We all know that Senator Vitter and myself and our
Republican colleagues are not ones to typically offer up bills
granting EPA more authority. But in this case I believe it is
not only the right thing to do, but the conservative thing to
do.
    TSCA is not a traditional environmental law that regulates
pollutants like the Clean Air or Clean Water Acts--instead it
regulates products manufactured for commerce. Under the U.S.
Constitution, the job of regulating interState commerce falls
to Congress, not the states. We support this legislation not
only because it better protects our families and communities,
but because it ensures American industry and innovation can
continue to thrive and lead without the impediment of 50
different rulebooks.
    It is important to note that today that we have a number of
witnesses focused on public health and the environment and none
from industry. This is certainly not because no one in industry
supports this bill--I would like unanimous consent to place
supportive statements in the record from a number of groups
including the American Alliance for Innovation which has sent
us a letter signed by XX trade associations. The reason the
majority has chosen these witnesses is to focus on the health
and environmental provisions of the bill, which have been
significantly strengthened as the necessary tradeoff for
greater regulatory certainty for the regulated as well as
better ensuring protections for all Americans, not just those
in the few states with a patchwork of programs.
    Major environmental laws do not get passed without
bipartisan support--Frank recognized that--and the simple fact
is that any partisan TSCA reform effort will ensure that
nothing gets done and Americans are stuck with a broken Federal
system to all our detriment. I hope we get this done to honor
Senator Lautenberg's legacy.

           OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BARBARA BOXER,
           U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

    Senator Boxer. Thanks so much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
welcome all of our witness. I am very proud that Mary Nichols
is here. She is really a legend in our State, and has worked on
the environment for her whole adult life. She now is Executive
Director of the California Air Resources Board. She is going to
describe the successes that we are having.
    I am also proud that my home State of California has been a
leader in this field. And here is the deal: we are prospering.
We have to reduce carbon pollution in order to address
dangerous climate change. And we can't wait any longer, because
we are seeing the impacts all around us. According to NASA, the
10 warmest years on record occurred since the year 2000. And
2014 was the warmest year on record.
    Now, people can put their head in the sand, but that is the
fact, and facts are stubborn things. According to a new peer-
reviewed research in the proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, and I trust my colleagues respect the National
Academy of Sciences, California's record temperatures are
driving the State's extreme drought, and scientists predict it
will get worse over the coming decades. And just 2 weeks ago,
scientists at NASA and at Cornell and Columbia found that if we
fail to act aggressively to cut carbon pollution, we have an 80
percent chance of a mega-drought in the entire west.
    In the face of all this peer-reviewed science showing the
impacts from uncontrolled dangerous carbon pollution, States
really should be working together to find solutions to prevent
climate change. Let me say, we know the American people want
action. This isn't a guess, this is a poll. In a Stanford poll,
83 percent of Americans, including 61 percent of Republicans,
say if nothing is done to reduce emissions, global warming will
be a serious problem in the future.
    So again, you can sit here and say it is not an issue. But
the American people are in disagreement with that conclusion.
    Ultimately, climate change deniers in the Senate continue
to attack the landmark Clean Air Act. Just last week, our
majority leader, Senator McConnell, told State governments to
ignore the Clean Air Act. Imagine, ignore the law of the land,
and one of the most popular legislative actions in our history.
So we know we can reduce carbon while growing the economy.
    And I want to talk about California here and the Regional
Greenhouse Gas Initiative. For New York, it is prospering as
well. And we will hear some of that from our witness.
    California is on a path to cut its carbon pollution by 80
percent by 2050, as required under our greenhouse gas emissions
law in our State, AB 32, and the people who tried to overturn
that lost at the ballot.
    During the first year and a half of the State's cap and
trade program, California added 491,000 jobs, a growth of
almost 3.3 percent, which outpaces the national growth rate of
2.5 percent. We are living proof that growing the economy and a
safe environment go hand in hand. And we are a very large
State. This has benefited the middle class.
    It may interest you to know that the Energy Information
Administration found last month that California's monthly
residential electric bill averaged $90, compared to Oklahoma's
monthly bill, which averaged $110. Under California's climate
program, many consumers are even receiving a twice a year
climate credit of $35. That further lowers their utility bill.
So California, New York and other States around the Country
should be proud of their leadership in putting forward real
solutions to climate change and showing that meeting the goals
of the Clean Power Plan will benefit our States and our people.
    I look forward to hearing from today's witnesses. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
    [The prepared statement of Senator Boxer follows:]

             Statement of Hon. Barbara Boxer, U.S. Senator
                      from the State of California

    Thank you all for being here today. I ask unanimous consent
to place into the record my statement, which lays out several
reasons I oppose the Udall-Vitter bill. The bill I introduced
with Senator Markey, the Alan Reinstein and Trevor Schaefer
Toxic Chemical Protection Act, addresses fundamental flaws in
the Udall-Vitter bill. Unfortunately, the Republican majority
would not permit it to be considered today.
    I want to note the presence of Linda Reinstein, Alan's
wife, and Trevor Shaefer who are here today, as well as
consumer advocate Erin Brockovich, who endorses the Boxer-
Markey bill and opposes the Udall-Vitter bill.
    It is clear that in its present form, the Udall-Vitter bill
fails to provide the public health protections needed and is
worse than current law. This bill still does not have the tools
necessary to put safeguards in place--even for the most
dangerous toxic substances like asbestos. I would like to enter
into the record an analysis by one of the leading legal
scholars on environmental law who said:
    ``[T]he Vitter-Udall-Inhofe bill will not make it easier
for EPA to regulate harmful toxic substances . . . . When
considered in light of its aggressive preemption of State law
that would actually remove existing protections in many states,
the bill is actually worse than the existing statute from a
consumer protection perspective. And the changes to the
regulatory standard and the failure to change the standard for
judicial review will provide job security for chemical industry
lawyers for years to come.'' [Tom McGarity, University of Texas
Law Professor, March 17, 2015]
    I have never seen such an unprecedented level of opposition
to any bill. I want you to see what that opposition looks like,
and I ask my staff to stand up now and show you the names of
more than 450 organizations that oppose the Udall-Vitter bill.
Some of the groups listed include:

     8 State Attorneys General (California, Massachusetts, New
York, Iowa, Maine, Maryland, Oregon, Washington)
     Breast Cancer Fund
     Asbestos Disease Awareness Organization
     Trevor's Trek Foundation
     Environmental Working Group
     EarthJustice
     Safer Chemicals, Health Families
     Association of Women's Health, Obstetric and Neonatal
Nurses
     * American Nurses Association
     Physicians for Social Responsibility
     United Steelworkers

    Let me quote from some of the letters we have received in
opposition to the bill.
    The Breast Cancer Fund said this: ``The Frank R. Lautenberg
Chemical Safety for the 21st Century Act . . . undermines what
few health protections from toxic chemicals now exist . . .
    It advances the interests of the chemical industry and
disregards years of work by health care professionals,
scientists, public health advocates and State legislators to
enact meaningful reform and to prevent diseases linked to
chemical exposure.''
    According to the Asbestos Disease Awareness Organization,
``The fact that the Vitter-Udall bill will not even restrict,
much less ban, the deadly substance that claims 30 lives a day
is nothing short of a national travesty. Any Senator who
supports this industry proposal is in essence supporting the
continuation of the toll asbestos has already had on millions
of American families.''
    EarthJustice had this to say about the Udall-Vitter bill:
``[T]he chemical industry got exactly what it wanted--again.''
    The Director of Safer Chemicals, Healthy Families, Andy
Igrejas, said: ``Firefighters, nurses, parents of kids with
learning disabilities and cancer survivors all still oppose
this legislation.''
    The Attorneys General from New York, Iowa, Maine, Maryland,
Oregon and Washington had this to say: ``[W]e believe that,
rather than bringing TSCA closer to attaining its goal, the
draft legislation's greatly expanded limitations on State
action would move that goal further out of reach.''
    Massachusetts' Attorney General says: ``On the crucial
issue of preserving our state's abilities to protect the health
and safety of the citizens within our borders the bill strays
far from a bill that can adequately protect our citizens from
the potential risks that may be posed by certain toxic
chemicals in commerce.''
    According to California's Attorney General: ``In
California's view, this constitutes poor public policy that
undermines the fundamental health and environmental protection
purposes of TSCA reform.''
    And California EPA says, ``Unfortunately, rather than
reforming TSCA to ensure that State and Federal agencies can
efficiently and effectively work together to protect the
public, this legislation takes a step backward from what should
be the common goal of achieving strong public health and safety
protections under a reformed version of TSCA.''

    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Boxer.
    We are going to have some introductions, by request, of
some of the members of the panel. Let's start with Senator
Barrasso.
    Senator Barrasso. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. It
gives me great pleasure to bring greetings from the committee
to one of those witnesses this morning, who is Todd Parfitt,
the Director of the Wyoming Department of Environmental
Quality. He has a long history of working in the State of
Wyoming and specifically working in this department. You will
remember, Mr. Chairman, that our former Wyoming Department of
Environmental Quality director, John Corra, testified here a
number of years ago. Todd has worked closely with him and has
succeeded him and is now our director.
    It is interesting, Mr. Chairman, because today, as Todd
testifies, he will have worked with a Democrat Governor and a
Republican Governor in Wyoming. He has always put Wyoming
first. He has done what is best for our State and our
environment. So it is a privilege today for me to introduce one
of those testifying, the Director of the Department of
Environmental Quality for Wyoming, Todd Parfitt.
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Barrasso.
    Anyone else here for introductory purposes? I don't believe
they are.
    We are going to go ahead and start with our testimony. We
would like to ask you to do your best to confine your time to
the time required. We will start with you, Mr. Myers, then we
will to the end, to Ellen Nowak. You are recognized.

 STATEMENT OF MICHAEL J. MYERS, CHIEF, AFFIRMATIVE LITIGATION
   SECTION, ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION BUREAU, NEW YORK STATE
                        ATTORNEY GENERAL

    Mr. Myers. Thank you, Chairman Inhofe, Ranking Member Boxer
and members of the committee, for inviting me today to testify.
    I am Michael Myers, from the New York Attorney General's
office. My perspective is slightly different from those of
other members of the panel. As an environmental lawyer, I have
worked for the past 15 years at the Attorney General's office,
counseling State regulators on legal issues related to air
pollution and climate change, and also litigating those issues
in the courts.
    It is particularly appropriate that the committee should
seek to hear State perspectives. Because under the provisions
of the Clean Air Act that EPA is using for the Clean Power
Plan, Section 111(d), States are in the driver's seat. But for
us to succeed in this critically important area, each State has
to be willing to take the wheel.
    From the perspective of a State, New York, that has already
taken action to cut power plant greenhouse gas emissions, I
have good news for other States: you can significantly reduce
these emissions from the power sector and do so in a way that
helps grow your economy. New York and other States in the
Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative have reduced greenhouse
gases from the electricity sector in our region by 40 percent
from 2005 levels. Reinvesting the proceeds from the auction of
pollution allowances in renewable and energy efficiency
projects has kept down electricity costs in our region.
    EPA's Clean Power Plan would build off the work that the
RGGI States and others like California have done in this area.
The plan would cut greenhouse gases from power plants by about
730 million metric tons, equivalent to the annual emissions of
powering half the homes in America.
    The shift to cleaner generation would also result in
substantial public health benefits, including 150,000 fewer
asthma attacks by 2030.
    But back to the point I started with: for this plan to
work, States have to be willing to step up. Some are
discouraging States from doing so on the grounds that the Clean
Power Plan is unlawful. My written testimony highlights why
such arguments are meritless.
    First, action under Section 111(d) to address greenhouse
gases from fossil-fueled power plants is required under the
Clean Air Act. The law requires EPA to ensure that States
achieve emission reductions from power plants necessary to
protect human health and welfare from the harms of carbon
pollution.
    Second, EPA's regulation of hazardous air pollutants from
existing power plants under one provision of the Clean Air Act
does not preclude the use of Section 111(d) to require those
plants to cut their greenhouse gas emissions. The implication
of that claim is that EPA had a choice. It could either use the
Act's hazardous air pollution program to cut power plant
mercury emissions that poison the fish we eat, or it could
combat climate change by using the provision the Supreme Court
speaks directly to power plant carbon emissions. Not only does
this interpretation defy common sense, it is wrong as a matter
of law.
    Third, it is clear that EPA has the authority to set
substantive emission limitations for States to meet. In the
absence of such a benchmark, State plans could vary widely in
terms of their stringency and effectiveness. States have a lot
of flexibility, however, on how to achieve their emission
targets in a way that best suits their respective
circumstances.
    Fourth, it is also clear that EPA has the authority to
interpret the best system of emission reduction to reflect the
various ways in which States and utilities have reduced
greenhouse gas emissions from the electricity sector. EPA's
building blocks approach appropriately recognizes successful
strategies, such as cap and invest programs, renewable
portfolio standards, and energy efficiency that States and
utilities have already shown can significantly reduce carbon
emissions and do so cost effectively.
    In conclusion, here is what I would urge State regulators
to consider. The world's scientists are telling us that we need
to act now if we are to have a chance at avoiding catastrophic
harms from climate change. Our faith leaders are telling us we
have a moral imperative to act. The law, the Clean Air Act,
requires us to act. And EPA's plan for cutting greenhouse gases
from existing power plants is on sound legal ground.
    Both EPA and your fellow States are open to working with
you on how best to cut emissions in your State. The time is now
for State leadership. So take the wheel.
    Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I look forward to
answering the committee's questions.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Myers follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

        Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Mr. Myers.
    Mary Nichols is the Chairman of the California Air
Resources Board. You are recognized.

            STATEMENT OF MARY D. NICHOLS, CHAIRMAN,
                 CALIFORNIA AIR RESOURCES BOARD

    Ms. Nichols. Thank you, Chairman Inhofe, Ranking Member
Boxer, members of the committee. Thank you for inviting me to
be here. I am Mary Nichols, Chair of the California Air
Resources Board, and I am honored to be here to support EPA's
proposed Clean Power Plan, which we believe will unlock State
innovation across the Country to protect our people and grow
our economies.
    The framework proposed by EPA is a workable, practical plan
that will cut carbon pollution, along with other forms of
pollution, with a focus on increasing energy efficiency and the
use of cleaner domestic energy sources. It provides an
opportunity for a better future.
    This is a future that we are already working to create in
California. Our success story has been one of bipartisanship.
The 2006 California Global Warming Solutions Act was signed by
our Republican former Governor, Schwarzenegger, who appointed
me to this position, and our Democratic Governor, Jerry Brown,
who has reappointed me and also, more importantly, has placed
climate change at the core of his agenda, championing our
enormously successful carbon market, ramping up green energy
programs and working nationally and internationally to spread
solutions that will protect our vulnerable citizens, our
extremely valuable agricultural industry, our coastline and our
forests against the already-growing reality of climate change.
    Californians overwhelmingly support our board's efforts to
move California toward cleaner and more efficient sources of
energy and to address the grave threat that global warming
poses to America and to the world.
    I am here today to share some of our successes with you and
to emphasize that EPA is using its Clean Air Act authority in
the way that it was meant to, to spread success across the
Country and to encourage each State to develop its own plan to
cut carbon pollution and to grow its economy.
    I am going to skip some of what is in the prepared
testimony, because I really want to focus on the fact that we
believe that working together, not just as an environmental
agency, but under the direction of our Governor, with the
Public Utilities Commission, and our Energy Commission, as well
as the independent system operator that controls the
transmission wires, we can deliver not only a more resilient
energy system but we can also meet and even exceed the targets
that EPA has set. We are on track for a third of our State's
energy needs to be met by renewable energy by the year 2020.
And Governor Brown has established a goal of getting to 50
percent of our energy from renewable resources by 2030.
    Our carbon-wide carbon intensity has already fallen by
nearly 5 percent since 2009, and it will keep falling. Now,
that is not only due to electrical power plants, it is also due
to cleaner fuels and cleaner vehicles, which are an integral
part of our plan. The power plan, the EPA power plan, is only
one piece of the overall President's climate plan. But it is an
important one.
    But the main thing I want to emphasize is that this is
happening at the same time that California is prospering. We
are growing jobs. We are growing our economy faster than the
rest of the Country. We have grown our jobs since the carbon
market has gone into operation by 3.3 percent. Personal income
and wages are up, again, growing at rates well above the
national average. Our electric power grid delivers power
reliably, resiliently and efficiently, thanks to the continued
stewardship of the transmission operators. And as Senator Boxer
indicated, power bills are actually down. Californians pay the
ninth lowest electricity bills in the Country.
    States all across the Country, and we do talk to many of
our colleagues, are discovering that clean energy pays big
dividends. For example, Oklahoma is on track to exceed its 15
percent renewable energy target for 2015, thanks to a very
successful wind energy industry, a policy that has yielded
billions of dollars in investment in that State and helped to
cut pollution.
    And of course, California and Oklahoma are not alone. We
know that Texas, often billed as our rival in many ways, leads
the Nation in wind industry. Many States in the Midwest, as
well as the West and the South, are taking action to ensure
their ratepayers and their citizens against risks to
reliability that come from dirty and inefficient coal plants by
replacing them with cleaner power and energy efficiency
investments are being used, again, in States red and blue, to
cut power bills.
    We think that the Clean Power Plan will encourage States to
take broader advantage of strategies that they are already
using, saving money and invigorating economies across the
Country. And of course, to the extent that they choose to work
together around their regional grids, they will do even better,
because we all know that a regional approach will be more cost
effective for all.
    As a result, we believe the net benefits of this plan
amount to something like $48 billion to $82 billion in 2030,
representing lives saved, sick days avoided and climate risks
abated, as well as greater productivity, lower costs and a more
efficient and secure energy system.
    So bottom line is, the Clean Power Plan builds on 40 years
of Clean Air Act success, federalism, as the Chairman
indicated, and now confronts us with an opportunity to address
one of the most severe challenges of our time in a way that can
also create new jobs and increase our energy security.
    Thank you very much.
    [The prepared statement of Ms. Nichols follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Ms. Nichols.
    Thomas Easterly is Commissioner of the Indiana Department
of Environmental Management. You are recognized.

STATEMENT OF THOMAS EASTERLY, COMMISSIONER, INDIANA DEPARTMENT
                  OF ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT

    Mr. Easterly. Thank you, Chairman Inhofe, Ranking Member
Boxer and members of the committee. Good morning.
    My name is Thomas Easterly and I am the Commissioner of the
Indiana Department of Environmental Management, also known as
IDEM. I bring you greetings from Governor Pence of Indiana, and
I appreciate the opportunity to share with you Indiana's
current perspective on the Environmental Protection Agency's
111(d) regulations for fossil fuel electric generating units.
    The proposed regulations will detrimentally impact Indiana
for a number of significant reasons. We are the most
manufacturing-intensive State in the United States. More than
80 percent of Indiana's electricity comes from coal. We have a
300-year supply of coal in our State, and 28,000 Hoosiers are
employed in the coal industry. We recognize that we need all
forms of energy to power our economy, and the Pence
administration is developing an updated energy plan for the
State that will foster greater use of renewables and other
energy sources. At the same time, we know that coal is a
crucial Hoosier energy resource that must continue to be
utilized.
    IDEM's mission is to protect Hoosiers and our environment.
Following the release of the proposed rule, my office carefully
examined the proposal in light of our mission. We also engaged
private sector stakeholders and other State agencies in an
extensive review of the proposal and its potential impacts. Our
analysis came to only one conclusion. This proposal will cause
significant harm to Hoosiers and most residents of the United
States without providing an measurable offsetting benefits.
    For those reasons, Indiana's Office of Energy Development,
Office of Utility Consumer Counselor, Department of Natural
Resources, Utility Regulatory Commission and my agency filed
joint comments urging the USEPA to withdraw this proposal. A
copy of the joint comments and a letter from Governor Pence
that accompanied the joint comments has been shared with the
committee.
    The most ironic impact of the proposed regulations is that
they are likely to increase worldwide greenhouse gas emissions
by decreasing the international competitiveness of U.S.
businesses due to increased energy costs. Competitive
businesses have been investing in cost-effective energy savings
activities for decades. Under this proposal, the total cost of
the products produced in the United States will need to
increase, eroding our international competitiveness and
resulting in the loss of manufacturing jobs in Indiana and
across the Nation.
    When these businesses close, U.S. emissions will decrease.
But worldwide greenhouse gas emissions will increase, as our
businesses move to areas with less efficient and more carbon-
intensive energy supplies.
    Indiana once held a competitive advantage due to our low
cost of electricity. But not anymore. Indiana's low cost of
electricity advantage has slipped and EPA regulations have
significantly contributed to that change in position. The State
Utility Forecasting Group in Indiana has forecast that a 30
percent increase in Indiana electrical costs, in part, from
USEPA regulations already in place, and the 111(d) proposal
will add additional costs on top of that 30 percent. USEPA
itself predicts that its 111(d) proposal will increase the cost
of natural gas and the cost per kilowatt hour of residential
electricity by about 10 percent in the next 6 years.
Furthermore, increases in energy costs hit the poor, elderly
and most vulnerable in our society first. At a time when
Indiana is doing all that it can to grow its economy and create
jobs, the EPA's proposal creates a very real possibility that
the increased energy costs will slow our economic progress and
raise people's utility bills.
    In Indiana, we are obviously concerned about the economic
impact of EPA's proposed rules on business and consumers, but
we have also filed 31 pages of technical comments. We want to
make sure the rule does not result in unintended consequences,
such as reduced reliability resulting in brownouts, or not yet
having all of the necessary infrastructure in place to convert
from coal to natural gas. For purposes of due diligence,
Indiana is evaluating all available responses to the proposed
regulations from submitting a State plan to participating in a
regional approach or simply refusing to comply at all, known as
the just say no option.
    However, the fact that this misguided policy will harm
Hoosiers and other people in our Country while actually
increasing the worldwide level of the very emissions it is
designed to decrease compels Indiana to oppose the proposed
regulations.
    Thank you for the opportunity to share our views and I
welcome your questions.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Easterly follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Mr. Easterly.
    Todd Parfitt is the Director of the Wyoming Department of
Environmental Quality. You are recognized.

  STATEMENT OF TODD PARFITT, DIRECTOR, WYOMING DEPARTMENT OF
                     ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY

    Mr. Parfitt. Good morning, Chairman Inhofe, Ranking Member
Boxer and members of the Senate Environment and Public Works
Committee.
    My name is Todd Parfitt. I am the Director of the Wyoming
Department of Environmental Quality. I thank the committee for
inviting the State of Wyoming to share its perspective on the
Clean Power Plan. The State of Wyoming has provided extensive
comments to the Environmental Protection Agency on its proposed
rule.
    In Wyoming, we take great pride in how we manage our
natural resources, providing for both environmental stewardship
and energy production. As our Governor, Matt Mead, has stated,
it is a false question to ask, do we want energy production or
environmental stewardship? In Wyoming, we must and do have
both.
    Wyoming sends electricity to both the eastern and western
power grids, reaching from Iowa to Washington. Wyoming
generated 49.6 million megawatt hours of electricity in 2012,
with 66 percent of this electricity consumed beyond our
borders. This electricity generation includes 88 percent coal
and 9 percent wind.
    EPA's proposal impacts States differently. Each State has
unique characteristics and energy portfolios that drive the
application of each of the four building blocks. For Wyoming,
the proposed goal is problematic and unrealistic to achieve.
EPA is proposing a compressed time line in which States are to
develop and submit their State plans. Considering the
complexities of the proposal and developing a compliance plan,
along with any needed State legislation, the time lines are
problematic if not unrealistic. Wyoming's emission reduction
required by 2020, which is 70 percent of the proposed State
goal, is far greater than can be achieved through heat rate
improvements alone. This disparity is often referred to as the
cliff.
    Wyoming's evaluation identified either data errors or
incorrect assumptions in all four building blocks. I will focus
on key concerns with block three, renewable energy, since it
has the largest impact on Wyoming's proposed goal. One hundred
percent of CO2 emissions from fossil-fueled power
plants, regardless of end user, will be attributed to the
energy-producing State. Sixty-six percent of electricity
generated in Wyoming is consumed outside its borders.
    According to EPA, renewable energy credits will be
attributed to the consuming State, not the producing State.
Eighty-five percent of 4.3 million megawatt hours of wind
energy generated in Wyoming is consumed outside its borders.
Yet when EPA calculated Wyoming's State goal, they applied a 6
percent escalation factor to all 4.3 million megawatt hours
generated in Wyoming.
    More than half of the land in Wyoming is owned and managed
by the Federal Government, subjecting many renewable
transmission projects to NEPA. While the intent is good, the
process is slow. A BLM high priority wind project took over 4
years for a NEPA decision. Now the Fish and Wildlife Service
requires an additional NEPA decision. Two Federal fast track
transmission projects in Wyoming are in their eighth year of
the NEPA process. Both are still awaiting a final decision.
    Finally, EPA's assessment of available land in Wyoming for
wind energy development failed to consider high priority
environmental conflicts such as greater sage grouse habitat,
other designated critical habitats, and protected areas of
cultural and historical significance. Factoring in these
considerations reduces available lands for renewable, as
proposed, by 83 percent. All of these factors lead to an
unrealistic goal for Wyoming.
    Now, directing your attention to the two graphs. Graph one
depicts as a bar graph Wyoming's glide path as proposed by EPA.
    Senator Inhofe. Which one is one?
    Mr. Parfitt. Graph one is on your right.
    Graph one depicts a bar graph of Wyoming's glide path as
proposed by EPA. One can observe the dominant influence of the
renewables component as shown in green.
    After review, Wyoming determined what is practically
achievable, given EPA's proposed avenues. This is shown in
graph two. The line in the graph represents Wyoming's carbon
emission requirements according to EPA's analysis. The colored
bars were derived through extensive analysis by the State,
representing what may be possible in Wyoming.
    As can be seen, there is a wide gap between EPA's and
Wyoming's analysis. Based on the proposed goal and with limited
options, the simplest illustration to show an avenue for
Wyoming to meet the initial 2020 goal is to consider how many
coal-fired power plants must be closed. This would result in
four plants closing, representing nearly 4,200 megawatts of the
State's total coal fleet of over 6,700 megawatts. Stranded
investment for these four would be nearly $1.5 billion, and
does not include the cost of replacement power.
    We look forward to continued dialog with EPA and the other
States as EPA considers our comments and reconsiders their
proposal. Thank you for allowing me to provide input to your
committee.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Parfitt follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Mr. Parfitt.
    Ellen Nowak is a Commissioner, Public Service Commission of
Wisconsin. You are recognized.

    STATEMENT OF ELLEN NOWAK, COMMISSIONER, PUBLIC SERVICE
                    COMMISSION OF WISCONSIN

    Ms. Nowak. Good morning, Chairman Inhofe, Ranking Member
Boxer and members of the committee.
    Thank you for the opportunity to speak on behalf of the
State of Wisconsin and provide you with a summary of our
State's assessment and concerns with the EPA's Clean Power
Plan.
    My name is Ellen Nowak. I am the chairperson for the Public
Service Commission of Wisconsin. Last fall, I was intimately
involved with the construction of the comments that the State
of Wisconsin submitted to the EPA. I submitted those comments,
together with our analysis, with my written testimony for the
record.
    Wisconsin is a manufacturing-heavy State, with industrial
customers representing over one-third of energy sales. More
than 60 percent of our State's power generation comes from
coal. If the problems in the Clean Power Plan are not remedied,
the work Wisconsin has done to restore our manufacturing sector
will be threatened.
    As a regulator, I also remain concerned about the
reliability of the grid, considering the dramatic, fast shift
in energy production required by this proposal. With that
background, and because of the far-reaching impacts of the
EPA's Clean Power Plan, we brought together an
interdisciplinary team. This team consisted of public service
commission experts in utility rate modeling, economics,
environmental regulation and engineering, along with department
of natural resource experts in environmental regulation,
particularly the Clean Air Act. Using a standard accepted
utility modeling program, we forecasted the cost of this
regulation under a number of scenarios with varying assumptions
about the future.
    Candidly, our team felt that taking into account the
impacts of this regulation on every family and every business
in the United States is the kind of analysis that should have
been done by the EPA before making such a proposal. The results
of our analysis have been provided to the committee. Here are
two highlights.
    First, this single Federal regulation will cost Wisconsin
ratepayers between $3.1 billion and $13.4 billion. This is only
a production cost increase. It does not include necessary
upgrades to the gas and electric transmission infrastructure
that will add significantly to the cost of compliance. These
costs are also on top of the $11.6 billion in carbon dioxide
reduction measures that Wisconsin ratepayers have paid for
since 2000. Not only do we not receive credit for these
investments under the Clean Power Plan, but the proposal
actually penalizes Wisconsin for being an early actor.
    Second, as our assumptions about this rule became more
realistic, the cost rose. For instance, would you assume that
this massive increase in reliance on natural gas would drive
natural gas prices higher? That very reasonable assumption
significantly raises the cost of this regulation.
    At the heart of the matter, we question the very foundation
of this proposal. The EPA constructed four building blocks,
each of which was evaluated independently. Then to determine
the foundation for each State's target reduction, the best
system of emission reduction, or BSER, they added the carbon
dioxide reductions resulting from each of those individual
building blocks.
    Unfortunately, EPA ignored how the building blocks would
affect each other when all four were implemented together. For
example, increasing reliance on natural gas, as suggested by
building block two, would severely decrease the heat rate
improvement achievable in the coal fleet to far below the 6
percent required under building block one.
    Furthermore, EPA used indiscriminate and unsupportable
approaches to determine the four building blocks. For example,
building block one applies a national level heat rate
improvement to each coal-fired plant, regardless of the ability
of an individual plant to realize these gains. In contrast,
building bock three, the State renewable goals, takes a
regional approach and is driven by the average renewable
portfolio standards found in States arbitrarily grouped
together.
    As it is currently written under any previous
interpretation of the Clean Air Act, the BSER system proposed
by the EPA is actually not a system at all. First, the building
blocks are outside the coordination and control of the emission
unit owner or operator. Second, they are not recognizable
systems of work or practice or control that can be applied to
an emission unit. And third, they cannot guarantee a certain,
conclusive greenhouse gas emission reduction when implemented
as a whole.
    To further highlight this point, engineers at the Public
Service Commission modeled the EPA plan and concluded the
building blocks would deliver a 15.6 percent reduction in
carbon dioxide emissions. This is a far cry from the 34 percent
that the EPA claims is attainable and necessary for Wisconsin
to comply.
    Finally, the compliance timelines in the proposal are
unrealistic and unworkable. The lead time required for
planning, permitting and construction, not to mention the EPA's
own requirements, will require the full proposed compliance
period through the end of 2030.
    In conclusion, I sincerely appreciate the opportunity to
speak to this esteemed committee today. You will find my
submitted written testimony delves much deeper into the issues
of modeling and the technical aspects of the rule that we find
troubling.
    We can all agree on the need to protect our environment.
But this proposed rule does not strike the right balance in
protecting public health, reliability of the grid and economic
security. Thank you very much.
    [The prepared statement of Ms. Nowak follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Ms. Nowak. The end of your
remarks answered the first question I was going to ask you, the
problem that if you submitted a SIP in compliance with building
block one, and yet they came along and say, no, we have to have
a FIP, a Federal program for two, three and four, would that
create a problem. I think you adequately answered that.
    But very similarly, I would like to ask you, North Carolina
proposed to delay the Clean Power Plan until a final ruling by
the courts on the plan's many legal uncertainties. If you
remember, during our budget hearing, the administrator of the
EPA talked about, I think it was $3.5 million to hire a bunch
of new attorneys because of all the lawsuits and problems. I
would ask you, in your State of Wisconsin, you could end up
taking steps to comply with the Clean Power Plan that the State
came back and found that it was ultimately out of compliance.
So what kind of problem would that be for Wisconsin?
    Ms. Nowak. It creates a lot of uncertainty. As a regulator,
the parties we regulate, ratepayers all want and deserve
certainty about where rates are going to go and what we may do.
When we become commissioners, they don't give us crystal balls.
So unfortunately, we can't look into the future. But we have to
make the best decision, based on the information before us.
    We ran into a similar issue with the Cross State Air
Pollution Rule, when it was hung up in the courts, and
utilities were starting to make movements to attempt to comply.
We have to do the best to allow them to try to recover. But we
have to be judicious, obviously, in spending ratepayer dollars.
So we will work closely and obviously monitor the legal
proceedings and any legal proceedings that Wisconsin is
involved in, so we don't unnecessarily spend ratepayer dollars.
    Senator Inhofe. Mr. Easterly, in your written testimony you
talked a little bit and elaborated a little bit more on how the
Clean Power Plan proposal could actually increase, increase the
cost. This is an increased amount of emissions, and this is a
position that I have held ever since Lisa Jackson said that
doing something unilaterally in the United States is not going
to affect it. Because this isn't where the problems are, as you
saw on this chart, with China.
    Did you want to elaborate any more on that concept about
that, could it increase instead of decrease emissions?
    Mr. Easterly. Most of our businesses, the basic bottom of
our economy, the steel industry, the auto industry, rely on
energy costs. And they are internationally competitive. So you
can buy steel from Brazil, you can buy steel from India, you
can buy steel from Russia and use it. Actually, why would you
bother to bring the steel to the United States? You just bring
the finished product here.
    So the emissions will happen in those countries. Some of
those countries have decided to, I understand China signed an
agreement to consider stopping the growth of their emissions by
about 2030. But between now and 2030, those emissions, they are
so much higher per unit of production than we have here. So as
our businesses have to stay in business by being
internationally competitive, I am very concerned that total
emissions will go up.
    Senator Inhofe. All right. Thank you very much.
    Ms. Nowak, have you done an analysis as to how much of a
rate increase would the PSC have to approve to implement this
plan?
    Ms. Nowak. We expect it to be in the double digits,
depending on which method of compliance we use. It could be
easily into the upper 20 percent of an increase.
    Right now, we have an aggregate number of a $3 billion to
$13 billion for the State to comply. How that is eventually
broken down on a per ratepayer increase is something that will
be fleshed as we know more details and utilities come in and
ask for recovery. But this is going to be a significant
increase on ratepayers all across the board, low income to our
large manufacturers.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you.
    I am going to be asking you for the record, Mr. Myers, or
if there is time at the end of my 6 minutes, if you would agree
with the position that many have taken, that wouldn't it be
better to wait until these controversial legal issues are
cleared up before requiring them to comply? I hope we have
time, because I do want to hear your answer to that.
    So I would say to Ms. Nowak, Mr. Easterly and Mr. Parfitt,
what parts of the Clean Power Plan will require enactment of
new laws in your State, and how long would it take to develop,
pass and implement these laws? Let's start with you, Mr.
Parfitt.
    Mr. Parfitt. Mr. Chairman, as far as legislation that may
need to be put into place, anything that would relate to a
multi-State plan, if there were to be one developed, would
certainly need some legislative discussion. Anything dealing
with a renewable portfolio standard, basically the building
blocks three and four would likely require some sort of
legislation.
    Now, the timing of that, our legislature meets for a 40-day
session and then a 20-day session. So, alternating. Our next
session coming up is a budget session. So there are some timing
concerns related to when something could be brought forth to
the legislature in a meaningful way through an interim topic
study as well.
    Senator Inhofe. All right. Mr. Easterly?
    Mr. Easterly. So, in Indiana, our legislature also doesn't
meet year-around. So the next time they could consider things
is 2016. We don't have authority for building blocks two, three
and four. And then if I have to pass rules, we have an 18-month
rulemaking process. We will be years out.
    Senator Inhofe. Any further comment?
    Ms. Nowak. We have at least a 3-year rulemaking process on
a controversial rule, which I would submit this would be one.
And we would also have to change, we don't have authority over
building blocks three and four. If we were to increase our RPS,
or change our energy efficiency standards, those would all
require legislative action as well, which adds to the
timelines.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you. Senator Boxer.
    Senator Boxer. Thank you so much.
    What I am stunned by is some of the States' attitude of
gloom and doom when we have States that are doing this
prospering far more than your States. That is what kind of
stuns me. But it is OK, I respect your view.
    I want to ask Mary Nichols this question. When you listened
to Mr. Easterly respond to my chairman, in where they said,
well, actually, these rules could mean that we would be
increasing carbon worldwide, because some companies will leave
the States, they will be so upset at these rules. Have we found
companies running away from California? Last I checked, Silicon
Valley was booming. We have increases in manufacturing. Am I
wrong on the point?
    Ms. Nichols. You are not wrong, Senator Boxer. We have
experienced growth across the board. But particularly in the
clean energy sector in California, because of our policies. We
are the leading State in terms of investment in clean
technology, and also in renewable energy in the Country right
now. Solar energy in particular is building.
    Obviously we have some natural advantages in California in
terms of renewables. And I think it is important to say that
there needs to be transition time for all industries and all
States. When we implemented our cap on carbon emissions with a
trading program, there were many who were concerned about the
rising costs of electricity to our manufacturing sector. It is
a critical concern for everybody, along with reliability. No
State, no Governor can afford to take risks with the lights
going out in their State. That is job one. No matter how much
we care about the environment or greenhouse gases, and we do,
profoundly, we know that our job is also to make sure that the
lights stay on.
    So I think it is important to recognize that this proposal
that EPA has put out does have within it the flexibility and
the time that is needed. I recognize the concerns of my fellow
States, and I think they are legitimate concerns. But I would
assert that the proposal, as EPA has put it out, which
admittedly they will be modifying as they go forward, can
address those concerns.
    Senator Boxer. I think that is such an important point.
Because you make it very clear that we need transition time.
And we started a little earlier. I think EPA does get that,
Gina McCarthy does get that. She is very sensitive to the
States.
    Mr. Myers, I wanted to ask you, last year former EPA
Administrator Christy Todd Whitman, who served under George W.
Bush, testified before our Clean Air Subcommittee that it was
settled law that the Clean Air Act can be used to control
carbon pollution. Are EPA's proposed carbon standards supported
by the three Supreme Court decisions in Massachusetts v. EPA,
2007, American Electric Power v. Connecticut, 2011, and Utility
Air Regulatory Group v. EPA, June 23d, 2014?
    Mr. Myers. Yes, they are, Senator. The Massachusetts v. EPA
case, as you may recall, recognized that EPA has the authority
under the Clean Air Act to regulate greenhouse gas emissions.
And the Connecticut v. American Electric Power case was a case
that New York was involved in, where we sought to get the very
same emissions that the EPA Clean Power Plan is going to get
at. The Supreme Court in that case told us that Federal common
law nuisance did not apply, because Section 111 speaks directly
to these power plant emissions.
    And with respect to the last decision, the UARG decision
that you mentioned, the Supreme Court again reaffirmed EPA's
authority under the Clean Air Act to regulate greenhouse gas
emissions, and there found that under the Act's stationary
source permitting program, if you are emitting a certain amount
of conventional pollutants, then you also have to apply the
best available control technology for CO2 emissions.
    So I think all told, those decisions provide a sound
foundation for EPA's Clean Power Plan.
    Senator Boxer. Thank you, Mr. Myers.
    Mr. Parfitt, last month the Chief Environmental Counsel at
Berkshire Hathaway Energy, which owns a dozen utilities across
the Country, including Rocky Mountain Power, a regulated
utility serving Wyoming, stated about the State's compliance
with the Clean Power Plan, and I would like to get your
reaction to that, ``If the State wants to push back against the
plan, that is OK. But we really do have to have a backup plan,
because if not, we will be caught in a situation where we don't
have any option, and that is the worst of all positions to be
in.''
    She also stated the Clean Power Plant's 2030 targets are
achievable and urged Wyoming to collaborate with other States
to meet them.
    Do you agree with Rocky Mountain power that Wyoming would
be best served by completing a State compliance plan?
    Mr. Parfitt. I can't speak specifically to the comments of
Rocky Mountain Power. But what I can say is that our
evaluation, when we look at the entirety of the plan, it
doesn't work for Wyoming. Because as shown in the charts that
we displayed, the options, the building blocks as presented by
EPA in the proposal don't work for Wyoming. So we would say
that no, the plan doesn't work. We have more than one utility
within the State.
    Senator Boxer. I totally appreciate that. Last question.
Have you told EPA your concerns and have you given some options
to the EPA? Because they really want to work with the States.
Have you let them know how you feel and specifically what is
wrong with what they are doing for Wyoming?
    Mr. Parfitt. Yes, we have provided comments from both the
DEQ and Public Service Commission, and have had discussions
since the comment period.
    Senator Boxer. Good. Thank you.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Boxer. Senator Rounds.
    Senator Rounds. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    During the time that we were on the campaign trail this
last year, and I am new to the committee and new to the process
up here, one of the items that we talked about a lot was the
anticipated cost to the average American family with regard to
an increase in their costs for electric rates. The United
States Chamber of Commerce, last summer, I believe, estimated
the average cost to the average American family to be
approximately $1,400 more per year in their electric rates.
    I was curious, Mr. Parfitt, in a recent statistic that
comes in the case of my State, South Dakota, that our electric
rates would increase probably about 20 percent or more as a
result of the Clean Power Plan, this is significantly than the
8.8 cents per kilowatt hour that South Dakotans pay now.
According to the Wyoming Public Service Commission, compliance
costs for the 111(d) proposal could well exceed $50 per ton of
carbon.
    What impacts will this have, not only on ratepayers in
Wyoming, but also on ratepayers in surrounding States? I know
that people in South Dakota receive power from Wyoming.
Wyoming, as you indicated earlier, supplies power, because of
your location to the natural resources available, you are an
exporter of power. Could you share a little bit about what
effect this will have on the rates for people in the other
States as well?
    Mr. Parfitt. Yes. We do provide power to many other States.
If our compliance path, as we have viewed it, based on the
proposal, results in the premature closure of plants and the
stranded assets, it would likely result in raising of rates for
all the customers, not just those in Wyoming. It would be
shared across the network.
    Senator Rounds. What does the EPA propose or how does the
EPA propose that you respond to those stranded costs? What is
their expectation?
    Mr. Parfitt. This is an issue that we had raised with EPA
before the proposal was put out to notice, in hopes that would
be taken into consideration. In our view, that hasn't been
taken into consideration and we don't see, at least at this
point, the off ramp. We have expressed this concern to EPA in
our comments. So we are waiting to see how they might respond
in June when they come out with the final proposal.
    Senator Rounds. So you have not had a comment back, or
there is not a process within this to get a response back for
the stranded costs that you have indicated our State would
have, and would have to pass on to other States that also
expect the electricity or the places where your organizations
have contracts with them to provide ongoing electric power,
those stranded costs? You don't know how those would be
handled?
    Mr. Parfitt. At this point, EPA has not conveyed to us how
they would address that particular comment. The conversations
that we have had with EPA have been primarily to get
clarification on some of the corrections that we pointed out
within the proposal itself.
    Senator Rounds. The EPA claims that the rules give States
flexibility to create their own plans. But it appears that it
overlooks the fact that electricity transmission does not stop
at State borders. Many States, including South Dakota, depend
on neighboring States to help support their own electricity
generation and ensure the reliability of the grid. EPA's
modeling suggests that under the 111(d) proposal, Wyoming could
cut its generation by 7.5 million megawatts, or million
megawatt hours. How will you continue to power the regional
economy with cuts like this, and is that an accurate statement?
    Mr. Parfitt. As far as how we would continue, if we were
looking at closing down existing power plants, that would
create a reliability issue. However, this is getting a little
bit out of my expertise, within the expertise of the Public
Service Commission in terms of how to maintain the reliability
of service to all of its customers.
    Senator Rounds. Thank you, I appreciate your time. Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Rounds. Senator Carper?
    Senator Carper. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
    To each of you, welcome. I am glad to see you. Thanks for
what you do and thanks for sharing your thoughts with us and
responding to our questions.
    My colleagues know I come before many of these issues not
as a sitting Senator but as a recovering Governor. I want to
share with you a little bit of a perspective from the little
State of Delaware, from a guy who was born in West Virginia, a
guy who was a coal miner for a little bit of time. So I come
with a lot of different perspectives.
    When I was Governor of Delaware, I could have shut down the
economy of my State in order to try to be in compliance with
the clean air standards. And we would have been out of
compliance. The reason why is the folks who were creating cheap
electricity to the west of us, some of them put bad stuff up in
the air and it came our way. We are at the end of America's
tailpipe, similar to Maryland, Pennsylvania and New Jersey, New
York.
    I am a big believer in the Golden Rule, treat other people
the way I want to be treated. The concerns that you are laying
out here for us today, I think they are important concerns and
we have to be mindful of them. I get it. EPA needs to be
mindful of them as well. But I just want you to know that there
are other folks who have been adversely affected by the ability
of some people in our Country to develop cheap electricity,
dirty electricity, and we suffer the consequences. I don't like
it. We haven't liked it. We tried to go to court to resolve
that and we finally have succeeded in doing that.
    I want you to get in a car with me, use your imagination.
We're in southern Delaware. We are driving on Prime Hook Road
to the east, to the Delaware Bay. We get to the Delaware Bay.
There used to be a parking lot there, a big parking lot there.
It is not there anymore. Well, actually, it is; it is
underwater. You look off to the right, you will see a bunker
sticking up out of the water, about 500 feet out. That used to
be about 500 feet on the land, now it is 500 feet out in the
water.
    Something is going on here. We can't just make this stuff
up. And the key is for us, is how can we have cleaner air, how
can we address the issues of rising waters? Delaware is the
lowest-lying State in the Country. It is a real problem for us.
And in order for us to address this, we need to figure out how
to do it together. I am not interested in seeing EPA jam
anything down your throats. But we need to figure out to work
on this together.
    One of the issues is, why are we creating a lot of
electricity? It sounds like you export a lot of electricity. My
understanding under the rules that are being contemplated here,
you don't get a lot of credit for that. And the credit, I
guess, goes to California and those other States. We have to be
able to figure out how to deal with that. We ought to be able
to use some common sense in figuring out how to deal with that.
    I want to ask a question of the lady from California. It
sounds to me like your economy is doing pretty well. And the
question of can you have a cleaner environment and a stronger
economy, I think you have answered that. We think the answer is
yes, you can. I think it is a false choice. I think most of you
at this table would agree with that.
    There are a couple of things the folks from California, you
are in a situation where you acted early, you have been a good
citizen, a good steward. And my sense is you are going to be
punished for it, if we are not careful, by EPA. We are in the
same situation. We don't like that. What do you think we should
do about it?
    Ms. Nichols. I think your comment earlier about States
needing to work together is exactly correct. To my friend from
Wyoming, my local utility, the Los Angeles Department of Water
and Power, just concluded a very large agreement with a Wyoming
wind company to import wind-generated electricity from Wyoming
to help replace some of the coal-fired energy that they have
been relying on. They are actually taking responsibility for
being the largest emitter in our State, even though the
electricity that we were using was coming from Utah, as it
happens. And there will be costs associated with transitioning
away from the coal and into the wind.
    But overall, the net of it is that Los Angeles ratepayers
will still be doing OK, because the utility is taking steps to
help their customers become more efficient in their use of
energy. That I think is kind of the critical ingredient here,
that if our rates go up because of new investments that we are
making, that has to be offset in order to shield the ratepayers
from rate shocks and fro things that would just make it
untenable for them to move forward on this cleaner electricity
plan that we are on.
    But given some time for the transition, we can do it. I do
think that it was right to come up with a crediting mechanism.
I think EPA needs to do this if they want to encourage regional
cooperation as they say they do. They are going to have to
allow States to work together on either a bilateral or regional
basis to come up with programs where they can effectively share
the cost and the benefits.
    That is what we are doing right now through our agreement
with the Canadian province of Quebec, where we now run
literally a bi-State, bi-national trading program with
emissions allowances. Obviously, not everybody is going to want
to go that far afield. But the concept, I think, is one that
has been proven to work.
    Senator Carper. Thanks. Very briefly, can each of you just
give me what you think is a fair compromise to the issue of
Wyoming generating all this clean electricity by wind and
shipping it off to California and other places, not really
getting the credit for it? It sounds like the credit, as I
understand it, goes to California or the other Sates that are
the customers. What is a fair way to deal with this? What is a
fair compromise? Ms. Nowak, very briefly.
    Ms. Nowak. I didn't fully understand your question.
    Senator Carper. Mr. Parfitt, can you try to answer this? It
certainly pertains to you.
    Mr. Parfitt. As it pertains to the Clean Power Plan, I
think there are two issues, or actually three issues at play.
The first is the attribution of fossil fuel emissions,
CO2 emissions, being attributed 100 percent to the
energy-producing States.
    Senator Carper. Right.
    Mr. Parfitt. The other issue that is at play here is the
renewable energy that is generated in Wyoming, which most of
it, 85 percent of that, is shipped out of State.
    Now, applying an escalator to that, 100 percent of that to
the producing State, is unfair and I think it is a
disadvantage.
    Senator Carper. Mr. Chairman, I will say this. We have to
figure out a good compromise here, and you all have to help us.
Thank you.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Carper. Senator Capito.
    Senator Capito. Thank you. I would like to thank the panel,
thank the Chairman and Ranking Member.
    Let me just say a few words about my home State of West
Virginia and what we have had to say about the Clean Power
Plan. Our own DEP has called it patently illegal, invading the
province and it has been put forward with the finesses of a
bull in a china shop. I would note in the comments that 32
States have submitted negative comments, or comments of great
concern to this rule, while the numbers that have submitted
comments in support are much, much smaller in terms of States.
    But I want to talk about the reliability issue. West
Virginia has joined with other States, probably several of
yours, to block this plan, and we will be hearing this suit in
the next several months. And the DEP in West Virginia has said
that these goals are unattainable. We have heard some testimony
to that.
    With that in mind, I would like to talk to Mr. Easterly,
because we have a lot in common in terms of your production of
your electricity, predominantly with coal. We have 95 percent
of our electricity is generated by coal, for obvious reasons.
We have a lot of coal, although not as much as Wyoming.
    So EPA has indicated that it does not have any significant
concerns about reliability with this rule. Yet last week, PJM
Interconnection released a new analysis that found that the
Clean Power Plan could trigger up to 49 gigawatts of generating
capacity in jeopardy. Let me just quantify, 49 gigawatts is the
equivalent of the electricity that is used to power 50 million
homes. This is one of the studies that was recently released
that I think calls into question the reliability issue.
    Are you concerned about reliability in Indiana? I would
note that Ms. Nichols did mention the reliability issue as a
very important one for the State of California. I would like to
hear your comments on that.
    Mr. Easterly. Yes, we are. We have another group that deals
with the reliability. But here is our fundamental problem. The
plan, even in EPA's best thought process, has significantly
more fossil fuel-fired reductions by closure than it does new
generation of renewable and wind and other things. So the plan
necessarily will reduce the flexibility of our electric supply
in the United States. You add this to the fact that we have had
record PJM demand days, they are a little better handled this
year than they were last year under the polar vortex. And we
are in PJM and MISO.
    So we have increasing demand, we have decreasing supply.
And the renewable supply is valuable, but it is not reliable.
So sometimes the wind is blowing, sometimes it is not.
Sometimes the solar panels don't have clouds or snow on them
and sometimes they do. So you can't count on them for either
thing, for their nameplate capacity is much higher than their
actual generation. And they are not always available when you
need them.
    So I am very concerned, as are a lot of people in the
industry, that we will see some catastrophic result some time
during the implementation of this plan. We just don't know
where or when.
    Senator Capito. Ms. Nowak, do you have a comment on that,
the reliability issue?
    Ms. Nowak. Certainly. We have some significant concerns.
From the perspective of system reliability, the modeling
program used by the EPA to evaluate the building blocks and
whether the goals are actually achievable uses less robust data
than possessed and used by our own RTO, MISO. And so they are
responsible for maintaining our grid. Unfortunately, the EPA
never asked MISO to do any studies of the grid prior to
releasing this proposal.
    Examples of the work that we think needs to get done
includes gathering information about firmness of the interState
pipeline deliverability for gas-fired units, plans for
replacement of units, the impact on the increase of
intermittent renewable resources on reliability, and
considering the electric grid location and network
deliverability of units to be expected to be retired. Again,
the modeling used by the EPA doesn't appear to consider any of
these very fundamental and necessary factors. So we are
concerned.
    Senator Capito. I would note in my State we are heavily
reliant on coal for obvious reasons. But we also have a lot of
natural gas. But to transition these older plants to natural
gas is just not a realistic endeavor. It is exceedingly
expensive. And to build new ones takes a lot of time and a lot
of energy. You are going to expend energy to move forward on
this as well.
    You have also just recently closed one of your nuclear
plants in Wisconsin. And your plan that was put forward for you
under this Clean Power Plan does not take into consideration
your loss of nuclear power. That has to be a problem for you,
too, in terms of meeting this challenge. Would you make a
comment on that?
    Ms. Nowak. Sure. The loss of that plant is huge for
Wisconsin. We think that eventually that is going to have to be
replaced with a carbon neutral source. That was not taken into
account, and that will increase the cost of this proposal for
Wisconsin to comply.
    Senator Capito. Ms. Nichols, let me ask you a quick
question. We had a hearing last week on ozone and the new
regulations that are going to be put into effect. Is every
county in California compliant with the current ozone
regulations that we have presently?
    Ms. Nichols. No, Senator, we are not. We have remaining
challenges in both Southern California and in the Central
Valley meeting the ozone standards. And the new ozone standard
will add an extra challenge, as well as some extra time to that
effort.
    Senator Capito. So you put that on top of what we are doing
here with the Clean Power Act.
    Ms. Nichols. We care about the health of our citizens,
Senator.
    Senator Capito. I care about that as well.
    Ms. Nichols. We rely on the science.
    Senator Capito. In terms of how we are going to meet this
challenge, in terms of our timelines, extension of timelines,
extension of measures? What is going to be the best, Mr.
Parfitt, for Wyoming? What is going to be the easiest thing to
knock down on this Clean Power Plan that is going to make the
biggest impact for you to be able to meet the challenges?
Deadlines, timelines? Lower standards, less reductions?
    Mr. Parfitt. Certainly timelines are a big component of
this when you consider developing a plan and the time involved
with that and the complexities and the amount of agencies and
States that would have to be involved in that discussion, let
alone the legislation and rules that we have already mentioned
here and the time that would take would seem to be very
problematic.
    Senator Capito. Thank you.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Capito. Senator Merkley.
    Senator Merkley. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
    Underlying this entire discussion is the challenge we have
with carbon pollution, methane pollution and the impact it is
having across the world. But we don't have to look across the
world, we can look to my home State of Oregon. And indeed, we
are seeing that the fire season has grown by 60 days over the
last several decades, and the number of acres of forest that
has been burned has increased dramatically. We have an oyster
industry that is having great trouble because the baby oysters
have trouble forming shells because the ocean is 30 percent
more acidic than it was before the Industrial Revolution.
    We have a farming community that is suffering significant,
repeated, worst ever droughts because the snow pack in the
Cascades is steadily declining. And this year is one of the
lowest ever. While rain earlier in the year can fill a
reservoir, if you don't have the snow pack, come August, you
are in trouble.
    So as we see this impact on farming and fishing and
forestry, right now, we are not talking 50 years in the future
or 100 years in the future, we are seeing it right now, just
like Delaware. Senator Carper was talking about land that is
now underwater. Should the entities that are being damaged by
carbon pollution be able to sue those who are generating the
carbon proportional to their contribution? Mr. Easterly?
    Mr. Easterly. I am not a lawyer, so I can't answer should
somebody be able to sue. But remember that the environment of
our earth has been changing for all of recorded history.
Indiana used to be under a huge ice sheet. There are natural
variations. And the things you talked about, some scientists
would say, are due to the Pacific Decadal Oscillation. And they
are likely to continue causing harm for the next 20 years.
    Senator Merkley. Thank you, Mr. Easterly. Mr. Parfitt,
would you like to answer?
    Mr. Parfitt. I would echo those comments. This is a legal
question and I am not an attorney that can address that.
    Senator Merkley. OK, a legal question. But the principle,
you understand, of polluter pays, when you do some damage to
your neighbor, shouldn't you bear some respo9nsibility just as
a basic fundamental principle?
    Mr. Parfitt. I think this is a complicated question. You
have users who may have some responsibility as well. So from a
legal standpoint --
    Senator Merkley. OK, you don't want to answer the question.
That's fine. Ms. Nowak.
    Ms. Nowak. If the utilities and entities are following
existing law and regulation, I would think it would be a very
chilling effect to have them subjected to legal claims.
    Senator Merkley. OK, well, everyone in their first year of
economics learns about externalities, things that are not
reflected in the market, damage done by activities, certainly
our libertarian friends would say, when you do damage to your
neighbor, you should compensate for that damage. The fact is,
carbon is produced and methane is produced in a million
different ways. There is no State that doesn't produce a lot of
both.
    But we are seeing a differential in how States are taking
this on. Oregon, now, about 70 percent of its electricity is
produced in non-fossil format. And Ms. Nichols, you were
referring to a 2020 goal of one-third. But that didn't include
your hydropower, I believe. What is it with hydropower
included?
    Ms. Nichols. If we included the hydro that we receive, we
would be already at above our 30 percent, 33 percent goal. So
we chose not to add it, or the legislature chose not to add it
or nuclear, because they were trying to really push for new
solar, wind, geothermal and biomass energy.
    Senator Merkley. Right. Say what that percentage would be
again if those things were included, the other non-fossil. If
you include the other non-fossil.
    Ms. Nichols. It would be about 40 percent.
    Senator Merkley. Forty percent.
    Ms. Nichols. Yes.
    Senator Merkley. Well, you have to aim for Oregon, where it
is 70 percent. We are shipping a lot of wind power out.
    Ms. Nichols. We envy Oregon.
    Senator Merkley. And we often respect greatly the examples
that you are setting, particularly here is, you have set up a
marketplace. Now, if we turn back in time, there was a proposal
that came really from right wing think tanks about using
markets to regulate sulfur dioxide to take on acid rain. And
the concept was not to regulate every smokestack, but to
proceed to set up the marketplace and therefore the most cost
effective solutions would be adopted. How did that work out? Do
you have a memory of that?
    Ms. Nichols. Senator, I was the assistant administrator at
EPA when we implemented the acid rain trading program. I am
very proud of the success of that program. It did reach its
goals in terms of the amount of sulfur dioxide that was
reduced, and it did so less expensively. We relied on that plan
in designing our cap and trade program in California.
    Senator Merkley. So the marketplace for sulfur dioxide
worked extraordinarily well, actually, lower costs and faster
results than anyone anticipated. It was really an off the chart
success, and congratulations. Why wouldn't that same strategy
work well in carbon dioxide?
    Ms. Nichols. Well, we believe it would. It was, as you
know, defeated here, but within California it was actually put
on the ballot and the voters chose to keep that system in
effect. Because I think they became convinced that it would
lead us to a cleaner future.
    Senator Merkley. It was, you see carbon dioxide reduced in
the most effective manner, to achieve similar off the chart
positive results.
    Ms. Nichols. Yes, sir.
    Senator Merkley. And isn't the Clean Power Plan really
based around that same core principle of States developing
their own plan through a range of different choices of how to
address carbon? Not quite a cap and trade, but that is a
possibility that the State could employ.
    Ms. Nichols. It is clearly allowable. It is not required. I
know that EPA was very familiar with our program when they
designed the rule. But I also understand that they tried really
hard, it doesn't seem like they have quite succeeded just yet,
anyway, to indicate to States that they would have the ability
to design a plan that fit their own unique situation.
    Senator Merkley. Thank you very much.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Merkley.
    Senator Barrasso would be next, but he has graciously
conceded to let Senator Boozman go ahead.
    Senator Boozman. Thank you very much. Again, just for a
second, but I appreciate it.
    Ms. Nichols, following up on Senator Merkley's question,
you are out of compliance for ozone. And the EPA's regulatory
impact analysis says the annual cost to California alone would
be $800 million to $2.2 billion per year. Do you feel like
individuals should be able to sue you for non-compliance?
    Ms. Nichols. Under the Clean Air Act, citizens have the
ability to sue EPA, or indirectly, the State, for non-
compliance with any element of a SIP. California has submitted
a State Implementation Plan and we are in compliance with our
plan. We are moving forward steadily every year, bringing down
our levels of ozone. And we have actually come into compliance
in many counties.
    Senator Boozman. So your argument, then, is the same as Ms.
Nowak's in the sense that if you are doing things as required
by law, then you shouldn't be sued?
    Ms. Nichols. One of the reasons why we are here to defend
the carbon plan, the EPA plan, is that it helps us with our
ozone standard as well. We need all the help we can get.
    Senator Boozman. But in regard to the question, you agree
with Ms. Nowak in the sense that if you are in compliance with
what the regulation requires, you shouldn't be sued?
    Ms. Nichols. Mr. Boozman, I went to law school, too, and we
were taught that anybody can file a lawsuit.
    Senator Boozman. I didn't go to law school.
    [Laughter.]
    Ms. Nichols. Anybody can file a lawsuit and sometimes they
win.
    Senator Boozman. I guess what I am saying, what she is
saying is, that really would wreak havoc in the sense, there is
no way that you are going to be--when do you feel like you are
going to be ozone-compliant?
    Ms. Nichols. At this point, we are projecting off into the
future, we are working as hard as we can, but it will probably
be as challenging, it not more challenging, to meet the ozone
standard as it is to meet the greenhouse gas standard. That is
exactly why we are supporting the EPA rule, because it will
help us with both.
    Senator Boozman. Do you agree it will cost you $800 million
to $2.2 billion a year?
    Ms. Nichols. I can't verify that number. I would say,
though, that the economic analysis that EPA did in advance was
using all the tools that we would have used in the same way.
    Senator Boozman. Good. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator. Senator Whitehouse.
    Senator Whitehouse. Thank you, Chairman, and thanks very
much to the panel for being here.
    Let me ask first, Commissioner Nowak, in 2013, Commissioner
Nowak, the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel published an editorial in
your home State that said, ``Climate change is happening. Human
activity plays a huge role in that. The consequences of doing
nothing could be dire and expensive.'' Do you agree with the
Milwaukee Journal Sentinel on that?
    Ms. Nowak. Thank you for the question. My role as a
regulator or an economic regulator, we ensure also the
reliability of the grid, I did not or do not endeavor to take
on the policy behind what is before us. My role here has been
analyzing it and rules that come before us. I look for three
things. An environmental rule is coming; does it compromise the
affordable, the safety and reliability of our grid. That is the
lens that I look through this rule.
    Senator Whitehouse. No amount of environmental cost would
figure under your analysis, then?
    Ms. Nowak. No, that is not what I said.
    Senator Whitehouse. That is exactly what you said. I am
just trying to make sure that you put it properly and want you
to explain further.
    Ms. Nowak. No. The environmental rules cannot unduly
compromise the reliability of the--
    Senator Whitehouse. No matter how great the environmental
cost?
    Ms. Nowak. There is a balance that needs to be struck.
    Senator Whitehouse. How do you strike that balance if you
don't know whether climate change is happening and whether
human activity plays a huge role in that and whether the
consequences of doing nothing could be dire and expensive,
which I assume dire and expensive are words that would fit into
that calculus?
    Ms. Nichols. We look at what the impact on our ratepayers
would be and the benefits to the environment under the proposed
rule.
    Senator Whitehouse. But the impact on your ratepayers could
be felt through climate change as well as through just the
rates that they pay, could they not?
    Ms. Nichols. Those are --
    Senator Whitehouse. That is not a part of what you looked
at? That is not part of your analysis?
    Ms. Nichols. The benefits have been put forth by the EPA in
their plan. And we are weighing the costs against the benefits
that the EPA has proposed.
    Senator Whitehouse. For what it is worth, the Executive
Director of the Wisconsin Business Alliance has called
renewable energy an economic opportunity for Wisconsin that
will ``result in business growth, job creation, cleaner air and
a quicker path to energy independence.'' She recently said,
``We should look for opportunities to promote jobs and the
environment and the Clean Power Plan is a great way to do
that.'' So there appear to be other voices from Wisconsin.
    Mr. Parfitt, Rocky Mountain Power's owner, the spokesperson
for Rocky Mountain Power's owner, has said that multi-State
approaches are likely to be a less costly way to meet the Clean
Power Plan's targets. Wyoming's Casper Star-Tribune has said
that, the Montana officials have held earlier discussions with
other States about the prospect of cooperating to meet the
EPA's targets consistent with the multi-State approach that
Rocky Mountain Power's owner referred to.
    Their Wyoming counterparts, the Wyoming Casper-Star Tribune
continued, have thus far rejected regional advances. Now,
Montana, which is also a rural State that generates a
significant portion of its electricity from coal, has come up
with five draft options for complying with the proposed
standards, including options that would not require Montana to
shutter its coal plants.
    So if Montana can do this, why can't Wyoming? And if
Montana will work with other States, why won't Wyoming?
    Mr. Parfitt. First I will address Montana's five different
alternatives. In their alternatives, they assume that they will
get credit for 100 percent of the wind energy. And that is not
what has been conveyed by EPA. We have been told that we will
get no credit for wind energy that is consumed outside the
State. So that is one difference.
    As far as the multi-State discussions, I will say that we
have been involved with the same group, the Center for New
Energy Environment, and participating in those conversations
along with Montana and 13 other States. Now, there are
challenges with a multi-State plan, particularly when we don't
know what the end goal is going to be. All we have right now is
what has been proposed. We don't know how EPA is going to
change that proposal based on the comments that have been
received.
    So we don't know what the targets are going to be.
    Senator Whitehouse. Do you agree that climate change is
happening, that human activity plays a huge role in it and that
the consequences of doing nothing could be dire and expensive?
    Mr. Parfitt. I am here to talk about the Clean Power Plan
and whether or not we are going to do something to address
CO2 emissions, whether or not this is a good plan
and is it workable for Wyoming. And the answer is, it is not
workable for Wyoming.
    Senator Whitehouse. Irrespective of the amount of damage
that CO2 2 might do? There is no number from
CO2 harm that could cause you to change your point
of view on that?
    Mr. Parfitt. Not on the proposed plan and what that does to
plants.
    Senator Whitehouse. Very well. And finally, Mr. Easterly,
how have you built the costs of climate change for Indiana into
your analysis of the value of the Clean Power Plan?
    Mr. Easterly. I don't think you can quantify any cost of
future climate change on the State of Indiana. Let's go back to
your other question.
    Senator Whitehouse. Why do you not think you can quantify
it? Isn't that part of your job?
    Mr. Easterly. There is nothing concrete to quantify. There
is speculation.
    Senator Whitehouse. Have you read the report that says that
8 to 23 percent likely increase in energy costs could come to
Indiana?
    Mr. Easterly. The energy costs refer to the Clean Power
Plan, yes.
    Senator Whitehouse. No, this is not from the Clean Power
Plan. This is from increased heat levels in Indiana requiring
increased cooling load during the--you are not familiar with
that report, obviously?
    Mr. Easterly. Not that one.
    Senator Whitehouse. OK. When you are talking about the cost
of electricity, are you talking about on a per kilowatt hour
basis?
    Mr. Easterly. Yes.
    Senator Whitehouse. Let me just say, I am sorry to go over,
can I just make a Rhode Island point?
    Senator Inhofe. How long is the Rhode Island point?
    Senator Whitehouse. Less than a minute.
    Average monthly bills of residential customers in Wisconsin
are $95.21, in Indiana they are $110.44, and in Wyoming they
are $90.85. In Rhode Island they are $91.48, lower than two of
these States, even though our kilowatt hour costs are higher.
Because we have invested intelligently in energy efficiency and
is that figure that really matters at the pocketbook.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Whitehouse. Senator
Barrasso.
    Senator Barrasso. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. First
to Ms. Nowak, it is affordability, reliability and safety, are
those what you consider?
    Ms. Nowak. Correct.
    Senator Barrasso. Thank you. Mr. Parfitt, just to kind of
review, when it comes to how the EPA credits renewable energy,
Wyoming, which produces a significant amount of renewable
energy, still stands to be severely disadvantaged. You talked
about how much Wyoming produced in terms of wind energy. I
think you said that 85 percent of Wyoming's wind energy is
exported to a number of other State. I heard Chairman Nichols
say that California wants to buy even more Wyoming wind energy.
    But the EPA has said no, that renewable energy is going to
only be credited to the State where it is consumed, not where
the energy is created, the hosting State, which means that
Wyoming gets absolutely no credit for most of the wind energy
that it develops. So I appreciate Senator Carper saying that
needs to be addressed.
    My question is, how is this going to impact Wyoming's
ability to attain our emission target? And how much additional
renewable generation would we have to develop just to meet the
EPA's proposed target?
    Mr. Parfitt. This makes it very difficult for Wyoming to
achieve its target. The estimate of renewable would be
somewhere around 9 million megawatts of wind energy that would
have to be developed in order for us to meet our target. Right
now Wyoming consumes about 600,000 megawatts of wind energy. So
that equates to about a 1,400 or 1,500 percent increase of
renewable that Wyoming uses right now.
    Senator Barrasso. And you mentioned a lack of flexibility
from the EPA in giving Wyoming what we would need in order to
continue to produce a lot of the renewable sources. You
mentioned that more than half of the land in Wyoming is
federally owned, that this has a significant on meeting the
mandates coming out of the EPA. Your reference to permits, to
the NEPA process, to the ESA requirements for which Wyoming has
absolutely no control, and it doesn't seem the EPA is proposing
any sort of relief in the plans to address these. You
specifically cited that only one-sixth of the total area that
the EPA has identified for wind energy development is actually
available for wind energy development, due to sage grouse
considerations, permitting requirements.
    It seems the EPA is telling people in Wyoming to move
faster in renewable energy while refusing to acknowledge that
Washington's foot is still on the regulatory brakes. So can you
go into a little more detail about how Federal land ownership
in Wyoming and the red tape that goes with developing energy
resources on that land is a Washington roadblock that the EPA
ought to address, if they want Wyoming to develop cleaner
energy faster?
    Mr. Parfitt. Yes. What we have seen for wind energy
projects, when you have to go through the NEPA process, or
those projects go through the NEPA process, that they have
taken anywhere from four to 8 years to get approved through the
NEPA process. Then there is an additional Fish and Wildlife
Service process for eagle take permits. Those will add to the
time involved.
    The other piece of it is transmission. You have to have
transmission to move the energy out of the State. Those right
now, we have two projects that have taken up to 8 years to get
through the permitting process. And they are still in that
process now.
    Senator Barrasso. And we had previous discussion and debate
and votes, actually, in the Energy Committee, about
transmission lines under the Democrat-controlled Senate in the
past. And Democrats specifically voted to block transmission
lines on the public lands, which half of the Wyoming land is
public land. So that I think actually has played into exactly
what you are talking about as well.
    Mr. Parfitt. That is correct.
    Senator Barrasso. You also talked about the potential
closure of four coal-fired power plants in Wyoming, over $1.4
billion, according to the Wyoming Public Service Commission.
That is lost investment. And who knows how much it will cost to
replace the lost power.
    Of course, that is going to be passed on, I would assume,
to citizens within the six-State territory of Pacific Corps.
And Senator Whitehouse asked a specific question about Pacific
Corps. So would that mean that folks in not just Wyoming, but
California, Washington State, Oregon, Idaho and Utah are all
going to get a big new energy tax increase because of what the
EPA is trying to do in closing those four power plants in
Wyoming and having to build new plants? Am I correct in
characterizing what you are saying?
    Mr. Parfitt. That is correct. Those costs would be
distributed amongst all the States involved with that system.
    Senator Barrasso. So California would have higher electric
bills as a result of the EPA mandates here through that Pacific
Corps.
    Mr. Parfitt. There is a portion of Northern California that
is part of that system.
    Senator Barrasso. A growing number of States are raising
concerns that any type of implementation plan worked out with
EPA is immediately going to become federally enforceable,
making a State vulnerable to sue and settle lawsuits between
environmental groups and the EPA. But unlike most sue and
settle arrangements, which deal with a single plan or single
facility under EPA's Power Plant rule, a States entire
electricity system could become subject to environmental
lawsuits. EPA actually agrees with this concern. During
question and answer in an event in February, the EPA's Acting
Air Administrator, Janet McCabe, says she sees potential for
States being subject to third party lawsuits if they submit
State implementation plans. We have heard it from the Texas
public utilities commissioner as well.
    Mr. Chairman, I would like to, if there is time to ask a
couple of folks here, maybe the first three in the panel, if
so, do you believe EPA can promise some sort of protection
against these lawsuits? What are you seeing, Ms. Nowak?
    Ms. Nowak. We think the very foundation of this proposal
already intrudes upon States' rights. And to have any State
plans subjected to Federal authority is a great concern of
ours. I think State energy policy should be left up to the
States and in conjunction with the Department of Energy, not
set by the Environmental Protection Agency. So we have great
concerns about losing any State authority over any of our
existing laws.
    Senator Barrasso. Mr. Easterly.
    Mr. Easterly. We do not believe EPA can protect us from
lawsuits under the Clean Air Act. They can happen and they do.
    Senator Barrasso. Mr. Parfitt.
    Mr. Parfitt. We don't believe that we can be protected from
the lawsuits from third parties with a State plan, as the
proposal has been written.
    Senator Barrasso. Mr. Chairman, I am out of time. Thank you
very much.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you very much. Senator Fischer.
    Senator Fischer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all
for being here today.
    Commissioner Easterly, when we had the Acting Air
Administrator Ms. McCabe here earlier in the year, I asked her
some questions about the heat rate efficiency assumption for
building block one. And we know that EPA relied on the Sargent
and Lundy analysis for that 6 percent heat rate. And in their
own terms, they said that the EPA misapplied the data in a
cumulative manner inconsistent with how the study was
conducted.
    Do you have any other concerns with how the EPA developed
that 6 percent heat rate assumption that is out there?
    Mr. Easterly. Yes. Part of EPA's thought process for
building block one assumed that you would operate the plants in
a way that gained efficiency, which really means you have to
operate them at a steady State output. But then we have
building two, which says, but oh, your coal plants are the last
resort. You must operate your combined cycle natural gas plants
first and use the coal plants to make up for swings in
renewable and gas, and that will just make it much worse.
    There is also emission controls that you have to add on to
the coal plants, which have good reasons to be there. But they
all decrease the efficiency of the plant because this rule is
based on megawatt outputs and there is a huge parasitic load
for controlling those emissions. So there is a bunch of reasons
that the plants are going to be less efficient on a per
megawatt hour basis than more efficient.
    Senator Fischer. So do you think that improvement is
achievable in your State?
    Mr. Easterly. We are hoping, and hoping is a strong word,
that we might be able to get 2 percent if everything was done
that could be done. But it is a serious challenge, because
anything that is cost-effective, you have a reason to do it
anyway if you are the utility, because you make more money. So
the things that are left will only be cost-effective because
the cost of not doing them under this plan is more expensive
than the little incremental thing you will get.
    Senator Fischer. That is exactly right. Would compliance
with other environmental regulations, would that have any
impact on your State's ability to meet that 6 percent?
    Mr. Easterly. It will, because we still have some utilities
that are going to have to add more energy for NOx and SO2
reductions that aren't there now. So that will decrease their
efficiency as it is calculated under this rule.
    Senator Fischer. I support an all of the above energy
policy, and I know that many of my colleagues on this panel
also support that all of the above, that we need to have a
balance in our energy portfolios. I think that is extremely
important for a number of reasons, security reasons, cost
reasons. It is the wise thing to do.
    Do you think that this Clean Power Plan encourages
diversity within our energy sector?
    Mr. Easterly. Not in the long run. In the long run, it
basically is the plan to continue to shut down coal-fired power
plants and have natural gas and renewables. And those are fine
sources of energy, but if you have ever been in business, once
you get close to a monopoly, you have pricing power. And that
gas suddenly won't look like it does now in price. When I
worked in the utility industry for a short period of time, we
had a natural gas price spike. It was very disruptive to all of
our customers.
    So I am worried those are going to happen in the future.
    Senator Fischer. Let me go to another panelist, then I will
ask another question. Mr. Parfitt, do you think that we are
encouraging States to look at a balanced portfolio when it
comes to their energy needs with this plan that is before us
now?
    Mr. Parfitt. From our view, the answer would be no. It
seems like the purpose is to go to redispatch of other types of
energy sources to replace coal. So it is not looking at a mix,
it is really aimed at reducing coal.
    Senator Fischer. I am from the only public power State in
the Country. In Nebraska, we rely on our public power. It is a
strength for our State. It is a definite strength for our
ratepayers. We are very concerned about the impact it is going
to have on families across our State, when and if this plan is
implemented. Because we rely on our coal-fired electric plants.
We have diversified portfolios, we continue to develop those.
But to have a requirement, a mandate to have those implemented,
I think in an unreasonably short period of time, will affect
families and it will affect our most needy families.
    Mr. Parfitt, how do you view that in Wyoming? You are our
neighbors to the west. How do you view that? How are your
families going to see what is coming to them?
    Mr. Parfitt. We share the same concerns in terms of what
the proposal will do to utility rates. Particularly with our
compliance pathway as we see it, we would see an increase in
rates due to the premature closure of coal plants and the
stranded assets associated with that.
    Senator Fischer. And Ms. Nowak, in Wisconsin, I don't know
what your energy portfolio looks like in your State, but I
would assume that some of your ratepayers won't be pleased when
they get their bills?
    Ms. Nowak. Not at all. You are correct, Senator. Our
ratepayers have already invested over $11 billion since 2000 to
clean up our air. That is continuing to be paid for. We have
reduced emissions by 20 percent if you look at 2005 as a
baseline. So they have done that. We are not getting credit for
it. We are a predominantly coal State. Like Indiana, we are a
heavy manufacturing State. This will have a very large impact,
our modelers have estimated between $3 billion and $13 billion
just for generation alone. That doesn't include any natural gas
infrastructure or transmission infrastructure that needs to be
done.
    So that is going to hit every ratepayer from the low income
to our large manufacturers.
    Senator Fischer. It will hit every family in Wisconsin and
across this Country.
    Ms. Nowak. Right.
    Senator Fischer. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Fischer. Senator
Sessions, you were the first one here and the last to speak, it
looks like.
    Senator Sessions. Had a little Budget Committee hearing.
That makes us all nervous.
    Senator Sessions. Well, Mr. Easterly, I came here, I
remember thinking that I don't like this idea that there needs
to be a mix of sources of power. We just should add more
nuclear power, that was my simple idea. But as I have been
here, and seen the arguments, I am of the belief that if you
become too dependent on one source of power, you are not able
to have the competition that keeps costs down. Do you believe
that is still a valid concern?
    Mr. Easterly. Yes, Senator. Ironically, we don't have any
nuclear, and I would love to have some. But it is so hard to
build it, as you know. It is not likely to come in my lifetime.
    Senator Sessions. Well, that is disappointing, I have to
tell you. Natural gas rates have fallen and the costs of plants
are up, NRC is more regulatory than ever. We are almost killing
it off, which would be a disaster.
    I think the unifying issue that we can all agree on,
Republicans and Democrats, is a more healthy environment, less
particulates, less NOx, less mercury, less
SOx , things that make people sick ad kill trees and
that kind of thing. I think we can do better about that. In the
course of that, I think it will have a benefit on
CO2 emissions probably at the same time.
    But I am going to press down on the brow of my constituents
billions and billions of dollars in costs over the
CO2 issue, frankly. We just need to balance this out
and be reasonable about it, in my opinion.
    So I believe you said, Ms. Nowak, that you believe that if
these regulations pass, the cost of electricity will go up. Mr.
Parfitt, in your State, do you think it would go up also?
    Mr. Parfitt. Yes, that is correct.
    Senator Sessions. Mr. Easterly.
    Mr. Easterly. Oh, yes. We just aren't sure how much, but
more than double digits.
    Senator Sessions. And Ms. Nichols, do you believe that if
these pass, you indicated, I am not sure what you said, so do
you believe it will go up or not?
    Ms. Nichols. You know, there has been a trend, I would say,
over decades, for the cost per unit of electricity to go up.
But what we think is important is the bill, what the customer
actually sees. And in that event, we are holding steady. We are
able to hold that steady.
    Senator Sessions. Even if these new rules are passed?
    Ms. Nichols. I believe so, yes.
    Senator Sessions. Mr. Myers, what is your view about that?
    Mr. Myers. Yes, Senator, I would concur with Ms. Nichols
that it has been our experience that you can reduce carbon
emissions and also keep electricity prices down.
    Senator Sessions. Well, Ms. Nowak, you indicated, and we
have spent a lot of money, you have spent a lot of money to
make coal cleaner than it has ever been before. If those plants
are closed, are you saying those are the stranded costs, lost
investments that are damaging to the ratepayers in your State?
    Ms. Nowak. Correct. The costs that our modeling estimated
it would cost is for new generation only. It doesn't take into
account paying for units that have been recently built. Power
plants are paid for over many, many years. So ratepayers will
be paying for plants that are run much less while at the same
time paying for new electricity. So yes.
    Senator Sessions. Mr. Easterly, I would ask you to see if
you can say yes or no on that, too. But let me ask a simple
question. It seems to me that mandates, regulations drive up
costs, and in an economic sense the same as raising taxes and
having the government do it. The government could raise taxes
on everybody and then pay for cleaning up power plants or
whatever they want to do to achieve a certain goal.
    So I just want to translate this into reality for the
people who are buying electricity, businesses and homeowners
and people like that. So these mandates that require greater
expenditures to produce electricity are the equivalent of a tax
on their lifestyle. Isn't that correct?
    Mr. Easterly. Yes, it is. But different people benefit and
don't benefit. So if you are in a regulated utility that makes
a profit, if the price goes up and your percent of profits is
the same, that goes up. If you are an REMC, a co-op, your
customers are your owners and they really see it. There is no
net benefit there.
    Senator Sessions. I think that is the question, is the tax
on the economy worth the benefit that is achieved. And Dr.
Lundborg here, from the Copenhagen Institute, said that the
increase in CO2 over the next 60 years, is not going
to be a detriment to the world. In fact, it will be a net
benefit. He will agree that if this continues out into the next
150 years, you begin to have a cost.
    So he questions all the expenditures we are talking about
today. I just believe that is a fundamental thing. He talked
about how many lives could be saved for just a fraction of
these costs, helping poor people in a lot of different ways.
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate this hearing and the
good witnesses we have had.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Sessions. Senator Boxer
wanted to have just a moment for a unanimous consent request to
enter something into the record. So we will recognize you for
30 seconds to do that and me for 30 seconds, and then it is
over.
    Senator Boxer. It is never over.
    OK. So, Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to place into
the record a very important chart that shows that Californians
are paying $20 less per month for electricity than the national
average as we reduce carbon pollution in such a great way. I am
so grateful to Mary Nichols for playing a role in this.
    Senator Inhofe. Without objection, so ordered.
    [The referenced information follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Inhofe. And my 30 seconds, two documents, one from
the Census Bureau that says California has the highest U.S.
poverty rate when comparing income and cost of living across
the State. And second from the Manhattan Institute, the
migration from California to Oklahoma increased by 274 percent
in the 2000's. And we are adjourned.
    Without objection, so ordered.
    [The referenced information follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    [Whereupon, at 11:50 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
    [Additional material submitted for the record follows.]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

                                 [all]
