[Senate Hearing 114-23]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]





                                                         S. Hrg. 114-23

                   IMPACTS OF THE PROPOSED WATERS OF
                  THE UNITED STATES RULE ON STATE AND
                   LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND STAKEHOLDERS

=======================================================================

                             FIELD HEARING

                               before the

                              COMMITTEE ON
                      ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
                          UNITED STATES SENATE

                    ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

                             FIRST SESSION

                               __________

                       MARCH 14, 2015--Lincoln, NE

                               __________

  Printed for the use of the Committee on Environment and Public Works


[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]



       Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gpo.gov

                               __________



                         U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

94-983 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
  For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
  Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
         DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
                          Washington, DC 20402-0001










               COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS

                    ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS
                             FIRST SESSION

                  JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma, Chairman
DAVID VITTER, Louisiana              BARBARA BOXER, California
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming               THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho                    BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas               SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
JEFF SESSIONS, Alabama               JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi            KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND, New York
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska                CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota            EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska

                 Ryan Jackson, Majority Staff Director
               Bettina Poirier, Democratic Staff Director













                            C O N T E N T S

                              ----------
                                                                   Page

                             MARCH 14, 2015
                           OPENING STATEMENTS

Fischer, Hon. Deb, U.S. Senator from the State of Nebraska.......     1
Sasse, Benjamin E. , U.S. Senator from the State of Nebraska.....   125

                               WITNESSES

Lavene, Justin D., Chief of the Agriculture Environment and
  Natural Resources Bureau Nebraska Attorney General's Office....     3
    Prepared statement...........................................     6
Borgeson, Mary Ann, Chair, Douglas County Board of Commissioners.    14
    Prepared statement...........................................    17
Cooksley, Barbara, Owner Cooksley Ranch, Anselmo, NE.............    30
    Prepared statement...........................................    33
Wisnieski, Donald, Owner, Wisnieski Construction, Inc............    37
    Prepared statement...........................................    39
Crabtree, John, Center for Rural Affairs, Lyons, NE..............    48
    Prepared statement...........................................    51
Sheets, Wesley F., Executive Board Member and Nebraska National
  Director, Izaak Walton League of America.......................    55
    Prepared statement...........................................    57
Blankenau, Don, Attorney for Nebraska Association of Resources
  Districts and the League of Nebraska Municipalities............    62
    Prepared statement...........................................    64

                          ADDITIONAL MATERIAL

Letters:
    Jo-Ellen Darcy, Assistant Secretary of the Army (Civil Works)   126
    Koley Jessen Attorneys:
        Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-QW-2011-0880 Definition of "Water of
          the United States" Under the Clean Water Act...........   127
        Field Hearing on the preposed Waters of the U.S. Rule
          (WOTUS) Senate Committee on Environment and Public
          Works..................................................   137
Statement of the National Association of Counties Policy Brief:
  New "Waters of the United States" Definition Released..........   139


 IMPACTS OF THE PROPOSED WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES RULE ON STATE AND
                   LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND STAKEHOLDERS

                              ----------


                        SATURDAY, MARCH 14, 2015

                                       U.S. Senate,
                 Committee on Environment and Public Works,
                                                        Lincoln, NE
    The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:00 a.m. in the
Harden Hall Auditorium, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Hon.
Deb Fischer presiding.
    Present: Senator Fischer.

            OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DEB FISCHER,
            U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF NEBRASKA

    Senator Fischer. Good morning. Good morning everyone. This
hearing will come to order.
    I am pleased to bring the U.S. Senate to Nebraska and
convene this hearing of the Senate Environment and Public Works
Committee. Today's hearing is titled Impacts of the Proposed
Waters of the United States Rule on State and Local Governments
and Stakeholders.
    I believe Nebraska is the perfect place to hold this
hearing. Our surface water and groundwater are so important to
this State. Nebraskans take great pride in their stewardship of
these precious resources and they are rightly concerned with
the Federal Government's attempt to seize control.
    I am pleased to hold this hearing at our very own land-
grant university.
    So, to begin, I would like to say a special thank you to
the University of Nebraska for providing today's
accommodations.
    I would also like to thank our staff that is present today.
I have two of my Washington staff members present, Michelle
Weber, who is from Blue Hill, Nebraska, and Jessica Clowser,
who is from Seward, Nebraska. They are tucked back here around
the corner. But I am happy that they were able to come home and
serve here at the Committee to help me.
    We also have two Committee staff people that our Chairman,
Senator Jim Inhofe of Oklahoma has provided, Laura Acheson and
Lauren Sturgeon. So thank you for being here.
    And Senator Ben Cardin from Maryland on the Majority side
has sent a staff person as well, Mae Stevens.
    So welcome to all of you. I'm excited to welcome a diverse
group of Nebraska's stakeholders this morning to share their
perspectives on the proposed rule to revise the definition of
waters of the United States for all Clean Water Act programs.
This hearing will allow us to explore the issue in depth and
determine the impact this rule would have on our State and on
Nebraskan families. Last year, the EPA and the Army Corps of
Engineers proposed a rule that redefines Federal regulatory
reach to include everything from farm ponds and drainage
ditches to low-lying areas that are dry for most of the year.
This proposal is a massive expansion of Federal jurisdiction
beyond congressional intent.
    Congress limited the Federal Government's regulatory
authority in the Clean Water Act to navigable waters. And the
Supreme Court confirmed these limitations in the SWANCC and
Rapanos cases. The Court expressly rejected attempts to expand
Federal control over water, and made it clear that all water is
not subject to Federal jurisdiction under the Clean Water Act.
Instead of following the law, this administration has decided
to twist the rule's definition to include almost every drop of
precipitation that could eventually make it to navigable water.
This was not the intent of the Clean Water Act.
    Nebraskans take seriously their role in protecting and
conserving our natural resources. Responsible resource
management, including careful stewardship of our water, is the
cornerstone of our state's economy. This is a vital interest to
Nebraska's families, Nebraska businesses, our agricultural
industry, and our local communities.
    Nebraskans understand that the people closest to the
resource are also those who are best able to manage it.
    We are blessed to live in a State with 23 local Natural
Resource Districts served by board members from those local
communities, and to have landowners and communities that truly
care about clean water and a healthy and productive
environment. That's why it came as no surprise that Nebraskans
were so offended when the Federal Government made its proposal
without consulting State and local authorities, without
considering their rights, and without realistically examining
the potential impacts. I am grateful that Nebraskans were quick
to recognize the far-reaching consequences of this rule, and to
organize a group effort to raise the alarm. The common sense
Nebraska coalition should be commended for its efforts to
highlight the sweeping implications of this rule on everyone,
from county officials trying to build a road, to a farmer
managing rainwater runoff.
    Clean Water Act permits are complex, time consuming and
very expensive. They leave landowners and our local governments
vulnerable to citizen suits. The proposal would make it
difficult to build anything, whether it's a home for a family,
a factory to provide needed jobs, or highways and bridges
necessary to transport our people and goods.
    I am entering into the hearing record a letter and analysis
from Mike Linder, who served as the Director of the Nebraska
Department of Environmental Quality from 1999 to 2013. He
states that the rule is an erosion of cooperative federalism
that will harm the success of Nebraska's conservation practices
and programs.
    Today's hearing will begin with a witness who can speak to
the importance of the state's water protection programs and
cooperative federalism.
    Assistant Attorney General Justin Lavene is the chief of
the Agriculture Environment and Natural Resources Bureau at the
Nebraska Department of Justice. A native of Bertrand, Nebraska,
Mr. Lavene supervises the litigation and legal support for the
Nebraska agencies and boards, including the Department of
Environmental Quality, Department of Natural Resources,
Department of Agriculture, Game and Parks Division and the
Environmental Trust.
    Mr. Lavene, I thank you for being here. And when you are
ready, please begin your testimony.

    STATEMENT OF JUSTIN D. LEVENE, CHIEF OF THE AGRICULTURE
  ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES BUREAU, NEBRASKA ATTORNEY
                        GENERAL'S OFFICE

    Mr. Levene. Thank you, Senator Fischer. Chairman Inhofe,
and Ranking Member Boxer, Members of the Senate's Committee on
Environment and Public Works, my sincere thanks for the
opportunity to present the Nebraska Attorney General's Office
concern regarding the joint proposal by the United States Army
Corps of Engineers and the Environmental Protection Agency to
define the Clean Water Act's use of the phrase ``waters of the
United States'' in a manner that would appear to dramatically
expand the scope of Federal authority under the Act. The
Nebraska Attorney General's Office, alongside a number of our
sister states, previously offered comments to the Agencies on
the proposed--on the proposed expansive definition. The
Attorneys General apprised the Agencies of those aspects of the
proposed definition which are inconsistent with the limitations
of the Clean Water Act, as interpreted by the U.S. Supreme
Court, as well as the outer boundaries of Congress's
constitutional authority over interState commerce, and the
principal of cooperative federalism as embodied in the Act.
However, it is not certain that those concerns will truly be
considered, which is why we appreciate the opportunity to
present additional testimony here today.
    Congress intended the Clean Water Act to recognize,
preserve, and protect the primary responsibilities and rights
of the states to plan and--the development and use of land and
water resources. Nonetheless, EPA, along with the Corps,
persistently violates this principal of cooperative federalism
in practice and now seeks to codify a significant intrusion on
the states' statutory obligations with respect to intraState
water and land management. Despite Nebraska's consistent and
dutiful protection of its land and water resources, in a manner
consistent with local conditions and needs, the Agencies seek
to further their disregard for State primacy in the area of
land and water preservation, and instead make the Federal
Government the primary regulator of much of the intraState
waters and sometimes-wet land in he United States. The Agencies
may not arrogate to themselves the traditional State
prerogatives over intraState waters and land use; after all,
there is no Federal interest in regulating water activities on
dry land and any activities not connected to interState
commerce. Instead, States, by virtue of being closer to
communities, are in the best position to provide effective,
fair, and responsive oversight of water use, and have
consistently done so.
    The Agencies propose a single definition of the phrase
``water of the United States'' for all of the Act's programs.
Currently, there is a difference in use and application of the
term ``water of the United States'' for various sections of the
Act. In Nebraska, since the 1970's, EPA has delegated authority
to the Department of Environmental Quality to implement all
programs except Section 404 dredge and fill, and Section 311
oil spill programs. Thus, the Section 402, National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System, or NPDES program, the Section
303, water quality standards and total maximum daily load
program, and the Section 401, State water quality certification
process, are all administered at the State level. This same
arrangement exists in all but a handful of states.
    The continued State administration of the NPDES program
requires the Department of Environmental Quality to have an
equally stringent regulatory structure, including its own
definition of jurisdictional waters. Accordingly, the
Department has administered the various Clean Water Act
programs using its own ``waters of the state'' definition for
nearly 40 years with EPA approval. However, the regulatory
approach used by the Agencies to develop a single definition of
``waters of the United States,'' which will affect all the
Clean Water Act programs, is modeled after the existing
guidance provided by the Agencies and the U.S. Supreme Court
which was limited on its face to the jurisdictional
determinations for federally administered dredge and fill
programs found in the Clean Water Act of 404.
    When applied in the context of other Clean Water Act
programs, the proposal creates significant cost and confusion,
it increases unnecessary bureaucracy, and infringes on State
primacy, and exposes agricultural producers to new liability.
During the 40 years of State implementation of the ``waters of
the state'' requirement, the Department has applied the
definition to Section 402 permitting decisions thousands of
times. In Nebraska, livestock producers in particular are
subject to the requirements of either an individual or the
general NPDES discharge permit. In accordance with the terms of
their permits, which are often crafted in reliance on the
definition of the ``waters of the State,'' these producers
often construct waste control facilities and mitigating land
features, such as berms or waterways, to help divert runoff
from waters of the State. If the proposed definition of
``waters of the United States'' is suddenly applied to the
state-administered Section 402 program, the effectiveness of
all the Department's permitting efforts is brought into
question. The land features constructed by producers in a good-
faith effort to comply with the permitting requirements may
constitute a tributary or adjacent water. Moreover, long-
exempted operations may unknowingly find themselves subject to
Clean Water Act jurisdiction.
    Similar increased administrative burdens may result with
regard to the states' administration of Section 401, State
water quality certifications, and Section 303, water quality
standards. As the scope of Federal jurisdictional waters grows
larger with the promulgation of the proposed definition, the
number of Federal actions requiring Section 401 certification
of the State and the number of waters requiring the
establishment of Section 303 standards and TMDLs will likely
also increase. The Department of Environmental Quality will be
responsible for shouldering this burden leading to increased
budget and resource demands.
    The Agencies suggest that the rule does no more than
clarify what the Supreme Court has already declared with
respect to the scope of Federal authority under the Clean Water
Act. By now, the Committee members are likely familiar with the
Supreme Court's holdings in Solid Waste Agency of Northern Cook
County versus the Army Corps of Engineers, or SWANCC case, and
Rapanos versus the United States. Respectively, the holdings in
these cases confirmed the limits of the Federal Government's,
and the primacy of the states, over intraState waters and
required, at the least, a demonstrated significant nexus
between nontraditional and traditionally jurisdictional waters
before the agency may assert its authority.
    However, the proposed categorical inclusion of broadly
defined tributaries and adjacent waters looks to sweep a large
mass of previously unregulated land within the ambit of Federal
jurisdiction. And for any that might remain beyond the
Agencies' reach per se, the catch-all is proposed to allow
case-by-case determinations for any water meeting the vaguely
defined significant nexus test. The effect of these newly
included categories of land and water features is not clarity,
but rather an inconsistent and overbroad interpretation of the
Supreme Court's holdings and the limits of the Act which places
virtually every river, creek and stream, along with vast
amounts of neighboring lands, under the Agencies' Clean Water
Act jurisdiction. Many of these features are dry the vast
majority of time and are already in use by farmers, developers,
or homeowners.
    More importantly, the imposition of Clean Water Act
requirements on waters and lands far removed from interState
commerce or navigable waters is harmful not only to the states
themselves, but to the farmers, developers and homeowners.
Ninety-two percent of Nebraska's 77 thousand square miles of
area is used for agricultural production. The proposal treats
numerous isolated bodies of water as subject to the agencies'
jurisdiction resulting in landowners having to seek permits or
face substantial fines and criminal enforcement actions. Nor
must lands have water on it permanently, seasonly, or even
yearly to have it be a ``water'' regulated under the Act. And
if a farmer makes a single mistake, perhaps not realizing that
his land is covered under the Clean Water Act or Rapanos, he or
she can be subject to thousands of dollars of fines and even
prison time.
    Members of the Committee, we ask that Congress continue to
work to ensure that the EPA and the Corps recognize, preserve,
and protect the primary responsibilities and rights of the
states to plan the development and use of land and water
resources in our State. Thank you for the opportunity to be
heard.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Lavene follows:]

   [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Fischer. Thank you, Mr. Lavene. Now I'd like to go
through a series of questions with you, if we could.
    Mr. Levene. OK.
    Senator Fischer. I have a number of questions here and I
would appreciate your response to those.
    Can you talk about the role of the State in protecting
water quality and administering the water protection programs,
and what is that cooperative federalism that we hear about and
why is it so important that states have that strong role in
water protection?
    Mr. Levene. Sure.
    With regard to the State protecting water, as I kind of
mentioned in my testimony, and this kind of gets into,
obviously, the cooperative federalism issue, we have a
situation where under the Clean Water Act Federal Government
regulates a portion of the Act's responsibilities. And the
State of Nebraska separately administers some of the other
programs. As I stated before, the Department of Environmental
Quality in the State of Nebraska regulates discharge permits
under Section 402, water quality standards, and total maximum
daily loads under 303, and also water quality certifications
under--under Section 401. Again, it's a shared responsibility
that is--it's basically the function of the cooperative
federalism. And that is basically shared responsibility between
State and Federal Governments to implement these laws. Now,
part of the reason that occurs is that both the Federal
Government and the states have somewhat separate interests. The
Federal Government does have an interest in protecting
interState streams. So that is originally why the Act was
passed dealing with ``waters of the U.S.'' that were basically
navigable in fact. But the states have always historically had
a strong interest in protecting waters in the State itself. So
interState land use and water issues. And so in examining that
and looking at the Clean Water Act, it's appropriate that the
State perform the function of dealing with those intraState
waters. Especially those that would allow, in fact, interState
commerce. And so, again, that cooperative federalism is out
there, and I think it works well and has worked well for a
number of years under the current definition of ``waters of the
United States''. The problem here is you--you get to a point
where that cooperative federalism could come into jeopardy, and
I think that's because you have a situation where the Federal
Government is--through this new definition, would be inserting
itself or interjecting itself into some of the primary
responsibilities of the State. And that is reaching out into
intraState waters that should be solely regulated by the State
and not the Federal Government.
    Senator Fischer. And when you talk about the permitting
decisions that are--that are currently out there, those are
state-administered programs; correct?
    Mr. Levene. Yes.
    Senator Fischer. And this proposed rule--well, if we're
going to apply this expanded definition now to State programs,
what do you think the impact would be on the Nebraska
Department of Environmental Quality?
    Mr. Levene. Well, part of the problem here is, again, I
probably mentioned a couple of themes or topics here a couple
of times, but the State of Nebraska and its ability to
implement and administer those Federal programs under the Clean
Water Act, the State of Nebraska must go through a process of
adopting State statutes. And then the Department must go
through a process of adopting rules and regulations. Now, those
states and those rules and regulations need to be approved by
the Environmental Protection Agency to make sure that they're
consistent with the--the Clean Water Act and the provisions
there. And they at least need to be as stringent as--as the
Federal law. One good example that I think I discussed in my
testimony is that the State of Nebraska has its own statutory
definition of ``waters of the State.'' And it is different than
the definition placed on Federal laws of ``waters of the United
States.'' But that definition as codified in Nebraska State
statutes has been approved by the Environmental Protection
Agency and has been regulated. That definition has been used
and regulative of Clean Water Act programs. The problem here,
moving forward then, is in how it will affect the Department. I
think there's a lot of uncertainty with regard to how the new
definition is going to affect their administration. Will the
agency have to go back and go through another review process
with the EPA with regard to this new definition and our current
State laws and rules and regulations? That's somewhat of an
unknown. We don't know if we have to do that. We don't know if
we'd have to change the definition of the ``waters of the
State.'' We don't know if we'd have to basically amend those
rules and regulations. Basically what I'm saying is, we're not
sure that our actions today are currently appropriate under the
new definition or if the changes are going to have to be made
for us to continue to administer those programs.
    Senator Fischer. And I understand that this rule is going
to expand the practice on a case-by-case jurisdictional
determination. How is that going to really impact our State
operations; do you have any idea? I mean, I know there's a lot
of unknowns out there, but how--how do you think that will
impact the operations here in the State of Nebraska?
    Mr. Levene. I--I think it's going to cause some confusion
on behalf of both the Agencies and the individuals that will be
regulated. I think what you have here is, under this new
definition, you're going to have basically a per se--basically
an increase in the per se categorical determination of what is
a ``water of the U.S.'' And so that's going to expand
geographically in the State to encompass waters that probably
were previously not under the 25 jurisdiction of the Clean
Water Act. But in doing so you're also going to leave some
isolated bodies of water out of there that there are going to
be questions on. Basically, when you look at the proposed rule
and definition and what these isolated waters are, these other
waters, if you will, you do have to go through a case-by-case
analysis of that, and it really determines or comes down to
whether or not there's some significant nexus to a core water.
Again, the problem is, we're uncertain how EPA is going to deal
with that. And so because EPA hasn't given us that additional
information and/or guidance on how they're going to handle
that, the State of Nebraska's unsure on how we can implement
our programs using that same definition.
    Senator Fischer. Have you requested guidance?
    Mr. Levene. We have gone through--well, I know that there
have been various meetings with EPA and the Department of
Environmental Quality prior to this rule coming on, but I don't
think that those--those meetings were--I wouldn't consider them
consultation and collaboration, if you will, on trying to
develop language for the proposed rule to basically meet needs
and requirements at the State level. I don't think there was
really that give and take, if you will, between the State and
Federal Government.
    Senator Fischer. And you explained the State has been
delegated authority over the Clean Water Act program since the
1970's?
    Mr. Levene. Yes.
    Senator Fischer. And we have our unique ``waters of the
state'' definition that's been in effect for 40 years; correct?
    Mr. Levene. Yes.
    Senator Fischer. And if the certainty of that definition
and the four decades of decisionmaking by the Nebraska
Department of Environmental Quality is basically turned upside
down by this proposed rule, what do you think's going to be the
result? And address liability concerns, if you would.
    Mr. Levene. Again, I go back to this common theme of
confusion and uncertainty for the agency. And, again, that goes
back to, we are uncertain how the Environmental Protection
Agency is going to interject itself into the State's current
administration of the Federal programs under the Clean Water
Act. Again, we don't know if new laws need to be passed, new
rules need to be adopted. I think the Department of
Environmental Quality, and I think most everyone would agree,
that the--that the Department of Environmental Quality has done
an outstanding job in the last 40 years to protect the State's
water quality. So if you look at it that way, we're not sure
what issues need to be fixed. But here, without knowing how
we're going to proceed forward, you're basically going to upend
that 40 years of, basically, certainty that both the Agency
had, along with the regulating community, and what they--what
they understood. And so basically by doing that you're going to
have producers out there that are now uncertain about whether
or not an action that they might take could be or will be
covered underneath the Clean Water Act, which causes concerns
and also, again, for the agency side, for DEQ, until we get
that guidance from EPA, we're--we're just uncertain. That
uncertainty and that confusion basically, in my mind, breeds
litigation, and it--it breeds potential liability on behalf of
those producers. Because if they go out and take an action that
is then, you know, after the fact determined to be the waters
of the U.S., again, they can be exposed to fines and potential
criminal penalties. And so when you have that situation of
uncertainty along with the potential of fines and, you know,
jail time, you're going to get to a point where there's going
to have to be litigation on this between producers and the
agencies that are enforcing these--these laws.
    Senator Fischer. For the benefit of the public here, if you
could explain the holdings in those two Supreme Court cases
that both of us mentioned in our statements about confirming
the limits of the Federal Government's authority over water
that Nebraska--or that Congress has established in the Clean
Water Act, if you could go into a little detail on those two
cases, I'd appreciate it.
    Mr. Levene. I will. And I'll kind of maybe put them
together.
    Senator Fischer. OK.
    Mr. Levene. They're pretty substantial. But the SWANCC
case, or the earlier case in the State of Illinois, was against
the Army Corps of Engineers. And both SWANCC and Rapanos
basically dealt with bodies of water. In one case a pond, and
in another case a series of wetlands. And that these bodies of
water are--were adjacent to non-navigable tributaries. So they
were not directly connected to a ``water of the U.S.'' under
the current definition, if you will. In the SWANCC case the
entities that actually wanted to do a dredge and fill went to
the Corps and asked whether or not they needed to have a 404
permit. The answer was no. Until it was later determined that
some birds were flying overhead and landing on the pond and
using it like a natural habitat. And because they were
migratory birds, the Corps then felt that was something that
affected interState commerce. And because it affected
interState commerce, the Agency felt that it would be
determined to be waters of the U.S., which would be then
subject to the Clean Water Act jurisdiction and requirements of
a 404 permit. In that case you basically had a decision that
the Court said, that's way too tenuous of a line to draw
between an interState commerce for migratory birds and a body
of water that does not meet a navigable stream. And so that was
one limitation on the Federal Government in SWANCC. The other
one, in Rapanos, there are actually two opinions that came out,
the plurality opinion and an opinion by Justice Kennedy. Both
of these were dealing with the secondary water issues
definitions. The two opinions kind of had a different viewpoint
on how they should analyze it. However, they both came to the
conclusion that these wetlands should not be considered waters
of the U.S. and there's a limit on that jurisdiction by the
Federal Government. The plurality opinion in that case
basically stated that these secondary waters with these
wetlands, that there needed to be some continuous surface water
connection to a permanent water. And so you had to have a
strong connection, a permanent connection to a navigable water.
Justice Kennedy took a little different tack to it. But he
basically came out and said, look, there at least has to be a
significant nexus from the secondary water to an in fact
navigable water. And when he was going through that--that
ruling, or his decision in that, you know, if someone would
look at that as a hydrologic connection, but it had to be more
than a hydrologic connection, it had to be something that
really dealt with the science or biological or chemical makeup
of the wetland affecting that navigable water.
    And so both of those cases, what they did was truly limit
the scope of the agency in the jurisdictional waters of the
U.S. by saying, if there's not a connection then it's not going
to be underneath the purview of the Federal Government for a
404 permit.
    Senator Fischer. So let me ask you, in your legal opinion,
do you think this proposal by the EPA and the Corps would
adhere to or violate those Supreme Court decisions?
    Mr. Levene. Well, along the lines with some previous
comments that the Attorney General of the State of Nebraska,
along with a couple other Attorney Generals sent for comments
on this, we feel that the rule does violate the previous
decisions of the Supreme Court in limiting that jurisdiction.
And the reason for that really comes down to is, we have a
situation, as I explained before, is--is you're having a
definition that now is going to have a per se expansion of and
categorical jurisdiction over these lands and these waters. If
it's in a tributary area with an adjacent water, that could be
neighboring, in a repairing area or a floodplain area, if that
is determined to be, as a fact, a definitional term, it doesn't
matter what connection that body of water actually has to a
navigable water. It simply is per se determined to be waters of
the U.S. And so what that does is basically strip away the
analysis that the Supreme Court said you had to go through, and
that is, in the one instance, to at least have a continuous
surface water connection to that core water, or at least have a
very significant nexus to the core water. We're not making that
determination. We're simply making a per se determination that,
with a wave of our hands, it's under the jurisdiction of the
Federal Government. That's going to be the problem moving
forward and why this appears to violate the Supreme Court
rulings.
    Senator Fischer. And I understand one of your roles in the
Justice Department is to enforce the Clean Water Act. Do you
know what the consequences are with the penalties in violation
of that Act? Can you explain those, please?
    Mr. Levene. I'll explain the State level a little bit
clearer than probably the Federal Government.
    But in the State of Nebraska for--for having a, basically a
discharge into the stream or adding a pollutant to the stream
without a permit, that can be either a Class IV felony or you
could have fines up to $10,000 per day. Under the Federal--
Federal penalties, depending on whether it's a known violation
or the like, the fines per day could go anywhere from $2500 up
to $50,000 per day. And there are also various criminal
sanctions that--if you're polluting the streams. And so, as I
kind of stated before, those are pretty big fines, penalties,
and possibly criminal sanctions that could be imposed against
an individual if they're violating this act.
    Senator Fischer. OK. And, in your opinion, do you think
this proposed rule is going to, I guess, offer any additional
protections to water quality?
    Mr. Levene. As I've stated before, I think the Department
of Environmental Quality in the State of Nebraska, with its 40
years of history of implementing these Federal programs and the
Clean Water Act, I think they've done a wonderful job. Without
having further guidance and information from the Federal
Government on how they're going to interpret this new rule, it
really--it's really hard, if not impossible, to determine what
benefits would come out of it.
    Senator Fischer. OK. So let me see if I have this correct
from everything you said. We have a proposed rule that's going
to infringe on the state's authority to protect and manage our
water resources; it will disrupt the successful operation and
certainty of our state-run programs; it will create
administrative burdens for our Nebraska Department of
Environmental Quality; it will increase litigation and
liability exposure for our people and businesses; it will
violate Supreme Court rulings on the limits of Federal
authority under the Clean Water Act; and you don't believe that
there would be meaningful benefits to this in the end? Did I
sum you up pretty well 19 here?
    Mr. Levene. I'd say that's a pretty good summary, yes.
    Senator Fischer. OK. Good.
    I thank you for your testimony before the Committee, Mr.
Lavene, and appreciate you taking time to be with us today.
Thank you.
    Mr. Levene. Thank you, Senator Fischer.
    Senator Fischer. With that, I would ask that our second
panel please come up.
    (Short break taken accordingly--10:35 a.m.)
    Senator Fischer. Well, I would like to welcome the second
panel to the table. There are several excellent witnesses
representing a very diverse group of stakeholders, and they can
speak more of the impacts of the proposed rule and what that
will have on citizens, businesses, counties, and livelihoods.
    We are going to begin with Mary Ann Borgeson. She is the
Chair of the Douglas County Board of Commissioners.
Commissioner Borgeson is a native of Omaha and became the first
female to chair the Douglas County Board in 1997. In addition
to serving as chair, Commissioner Borgeson serves on the Board
of Directors for both the Nebraska Association of Counties and
the National Association of Counties. She is currently the
president-elect for Women of the National Association of
Counties.
    Commissioner, I am eager to hear how this proposed rule
will impact our counties and communities. Please begin your
testimony whenever you're ready.

STATEMENT OF MARY ANN BORGESON, CHAIR, DOUGLAS COUNTY BOARD OF
                         COMMISSIONERS

    Ms. Borgeson. Thank you, Senator Fischer, for the
opportunity to testify on the ``Waters of the United States''
proposed rule and the potential impact on county governments.
    For the record, I have submitted a narrative of my
testimony that includes additional information.
    On a National level, the National Association of Counties,
or NACo, has urged the Federal agencies to withdraw the
proposed rule until further analysis of its potential impacts
has been completed. Douglas County concurs with that
recommendation.
    Clean water is essential to all our Nation's counties. The
availability of an adequate supply of clean water is vital to
our Nation, and integrated and cooperative programs at all
levels of government are necessary to protecting water quality.
    Douglas County is a ``Phase II'' community under the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, or NPDES, the
section of the Clean Water Act. A major emphasis of the
County's Stormwater Management Plan is to improve water quality
by reducing stormwater runoff volumes. This approach is
lockstep with EPA's push to implement ``green infrastructure''
as a key strategy to improve our Nation's overall water
quality. Simply put, green infrastructure can have a
significant positive benefit for water quality, and with this
being an EPA priority, it is essential that the proposed
``Waters of the U.S.'' rule be supportive, and not
contradictory to, the continued implementation of green
infrastructure across the country. Put another way, if the
``Waters of the U.S.'' rule negatively impacts the
implementation of green infrastructure, it will mean more
taxpayer dollars being wasted on process rather than being
directly spent on water quality improvements.
    Counties own and maintain a wide variety of infrastructure
that is impacted by the current regulations and that would be
further impacted by the proposed rule.
    Projects we are working on already significantly impacted
by the current regulations are given the lack of clarity in the
proposed rule. We anticipate additional negative impacts. One
of our current projects is a prime example of how cumbersome
and expensive the for bidding process is, and the costly delays
are largely due to the inconsistencies in the application of
the rules and the lack of definitions. Our 180th Street project
will improve the section line roads from the Old Lincoln
Highway to West Maple Road. Besides providing easier access to
new developing areas, it will relieve the traffic--it will
relieve the traffic load on Old Lincoln Highway, which is on
the National Registry, and on the section line road. The
immediate area is currently being passed over for most
development due to a lack of access to major roads--roadways,
including the Expressway to the south. The project includes two
900-foot bridges over railroad tracks and a flowing creek and
two other bridges over an unnamed tributary. The initial
environmental permitting process for these bridges went
relatively smoothly and involved a Categorical Exclusion, the
lowest level environmental involvement. The process began in
2002, with the construction originally scheduled for 2010.
Design and permitting work began in 2005. But the environmental
documents are still not signed. The newest projected
construction date is now 2018 because of these delays.
    The reason for the delays is a small county road ditch
which is several feet deep and wide and full of weeds and
grasses with a rut at the bottom approximately eight inches
wide and an inch deep. There is no ordinary, quote, high--
quote, Ordinary High Water Mark, unquote, associated with this
rut because when it rains it is completely under water.
However, the Corps of Engineers has declared this rut a ``water
of the U.S.,'' prompting a redesign of the project costing the
County hundreds of thousands of dollars in delaying this
project.
    An additional concern is storm water clean-up. We deal with
disasters such as flooding and wind storms regularly, and these
types of storms impact many ditches, culverts, and tributaries.
Trying to get permits is already a problem in these situations.
Our country has made tremendous strides in improving water
quality since the inception of the Clean Water Act, but if the
process is not clarified and streamlined, more counties will
experience delays in safeguarding and caring for infrastructure
and expend substantial dollars in doing so. Dollars that could
instead be spent on direct improvement of water quality.
    To reiterate my prior point, I ask that the proposed rule
be withdrawn until further analysis and consultation with State
and local representatives have been completed.
    Again, I thank you for the opportunity to testify on the
proposed ``Waters of the U.S.'' rule, and I do welcome the
opportunity to address any questions you may have later.
    [The prepared statement of Ms. Borgeson follows:]

  [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Fischer. Thank you, Commissioner.
    Next I would like to welcome Mrs. Barb Cooksley, the
president-elect of the Nebraska Cattlemen. Barb and her family
raise cattle on their ranch near Anselmo, Nebraska where they
pride themselves on being good stewards of the land and water
resources. I'm looking forward to Barb's testimony which will
offer great insight on how the proposed ``Waters of the U.S.''
rule will affect this very special Nebraska way of life. Barb,
please begin your testimony.

             STATEMENT OF BARBARA COOKSLEY, OWNER
                  COOKSLEY RANCH, ANSELMO, NE

    Ms. Cooksley. Thank you, Senator.
    Good morning. My name is Barb Cooksley. My family raises
cattle on our ranch near Anselmo, Nebraska. I am president-
elect of Nebraska Cattlemen, and thank you for allowing me to
testify today on the impacts of the Environmental Protection
Agency and the Army Corps of Engineers' proposed rule on the
``waters of the United States.'' I'm here today representing
Nebraska Cattlemen's 3,000 plus members but I'm also happy to
lend my voice to nearly 50,000 ag producers in Nebraska. In
addition to my service to Nebraska Cattlemen, I currently serve
on several environmental boards and committees for the areas
and State. Land stewardship has been my family's priority for
generations.
    First and foremost, I want to thank you for your interest
in this issue and for continuing to be engaged, because EPA
intends to finalize the WOTUS rule by sometime this year. I'm
also thankful Congress included language in the omnibus package
that led to the withdrawal of EPA's Interpretive Rule. That
rule was problematic and did not provide clarity or certainty
for agriculture.
    Animal ag producers pride themselves on being good stewards
of our country's natural resources. We maintain open spaces,
healthy rangelands, provide wildlife habitat while working to
feed the world. But to provide all these important functions,
we must be able to operate without excessive Federal burdens
like the one we're discussing today. As a beef producer, I can
tell you after reading the proposed rule it has the potential
to impact every aspect of our family's operation and others
like it by regulating potentially every water feature on my
land. What's worse is the ambiguity in the proposed rule that
makes it difficult, if not impossible, to determine just how
much our family ranch will be affected. This ambiguity places
all landowners in a position of uncertainty and inequity.
Because of this, I ask the EPA and Army Corp of Engineers to
withdraw the proposed rule and sit down with farmers and
ranchers to discuss our concerns and viable solutions before
any additional action.
    I would like to use my time here this morning to show you
why this rule is problematic for operations like mine and show
you some pictures to help color the issues.
    Welcome to just outside Anselmo, Nebraska. In this picture
you will see the home place for our ranching operation. There
are several homes on this site since we operate the ranch
alongside two additional generations of family members. Our
ranch sits in the pristine Nebraska Sandhills. The Sandhills
are a unique ecosystem of mixed-grass prairie that has grown on
top of stabilized sand dunes. We use cattle to manage this land
to ensure this unique ecosystem is protected and maintained
rather than deteriorating and literally blowing away.
    This is an aerial photo that's been zoomed out slightly.
What look like waves are actually the rolling hills of sand
dunes, natural depressions, draws, and dry ruts that may have
water in them seasonally. What you cannot see is the unique
feature of the Sandhills which is its close connection to
groundwater supplies. This close connection makes it possible
for grass to be grown on top of the sand dunes. And at times
ponds can literally spring up in these depressions of the
Sandhills out of nowhere because of this connection. However,
within a matter of months, and perhaps for several years, the
water may be gone again. As you can see, currently there is no
water here. But the question is, is that dried up natural
depression a WOTUS? Are my seasonally flowing draws an
ephemeral stream? There's no water in the draw, but the
proposed rule suggests these features could be jurisdictional.
If so, will I be required to obtain a permit to conduct daily
activities across my entire property, such as building a fence
or moving cattle from pasture to pasture?
    Here's a pond with water in it and one without. This water
occurs naturally. Cattle and wildlife utilize this water. And
producers want to be able to allow cattle to use this naturally
occurring water body. If this pond is jurisdictional under the
WOTUS rule, would cattle or wildlife waste in the water
constitute a discharge that I would need a permit for? It may
sound silly to say that but in my interpretation, and many
others' interpretations, it suggests just that.
    Here's a photo of the same ponds where you can see they are
near an eroded channel that runs to the Middle Loop River. At
times, water does run off into this channel. Here's where it
gets put all together and see how the proposed rule expands
Federal jurisdiction. In the top right corner is the Middle
Loop River. This river is an interState water and falls under
Federal jurisdiction. That's uncontested. Now just to the left,
the eroded channel, the beige squiggly line, now it's
questionable whether this channel would have been considered
Federal water prior to the WOTUS rule. But now will most likely
be deemed a tributary that meets the definition of a WOTUS. And
under the proposed rule, every water body adjacent to a
tributary is a WOTUS too. It appears to me they would be
Federal waters under the proposed rule. If they are indeed
``Waters of the U.S.,'' I will need permits to conduct everyday
account activities through those waters. Permits that will cost
my family time and money. We will continue to do our part for
the environment but this ambiguous and expansive proposed rule
does not help us achieve that.
    We look forward to working with the Environment and Public
Works Committee to insure we have the ability to do what we do
best, produce the world's safest, most nutritional, abundant
and afford able protein, while giving the consumers the choice
they deserve. Together we can sustain our country's excellence
and prosperity and insure the viability of our way of life for
future generations.
    I appreciate the opportunity to visit with you today. Thank
you.
    [The prepared statement of Ms. Cooksley follows:]

    [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Fischer. Thank you very much, Barb, for providing
that perspective on the agricultural industry.
    Next we have Mr. Donald Wisnieski. He is president of the
Nebraska State Home Builders Association. A native of Norfolk,
Don is the owner of Wisnieski Construction which has served the
Norfolk community since 1986, primarily focusing on custom home
building.
    Don, you are to be commended for your community service and
operating that successful small business for almost three
decades. When you're ready, please begin your testimony.

             STATEMENT OF DONALD WISNIESKI, OWNER,
                  WIDNIESKI CONSTRUCTION INS.

    Mr. Wisnieski. Thank you.
    Senator Fischer, thank you for the opportunity to testify
today.
    As stated, my name is Don Wisnieski. I'm the president of
Wisnieski Construction located in Norfolk. I also serve as the
2015 President of the Nebraska State Home Builders Association.
Home builders have been an advocate for the Clean Water Act
since its inception. We have a responsibility to protect the
environment. And it is a responsibility I know well because I
must often obtain permits for building projects. When it comes
to Federal regulatory requirements, what I desire as a small
business owner is a permitting process that is consistent,
timely, and focused on protecting true aquatic resources.
    Landowners have been frustrated with the continued
uncertainty over the scope of the Clean Water Act over waters
of the United States. There is a need for additional clarity,
and the administration recently proposed a rule intended to do
just that. Unfortunately, that proposed rule falls short. There
is no certainty under this proposal, just the expansion of
Federal authority. These changes will not even improve water
quality, as the rule improperly encompasses waters that are
already regulated at the State level. The rule would establish
broader definitions of existing regulatory categories such as
tributaries and regulates new areas that are not currently
federally regulated, such as an--adjacent non-wetlands,
repairing areas, floodplains, and other water areas. And these
changes are far reaching, affecting all Clean Water Act
programs but no--but provides no additional protections for
most of these areas already comfortably resting under the State
and local authorities.
    I'm also concerned that the terms are overly broad, giving
the agencies broad authority to interpret them. I need to know
the rules. I can't play a guessing game of, is it
jurisdictional. We don't need a set of new vague and convoluted
definitions. Under the Clean Water Act, Congress intended to
create a partnership between Federal agencies and the State
governments to protect our Nation's water resources. There is a
point where Federal authority ends and the State authority
begins. And the Supreme Court has twice affirmed that the Clean
Water Act places limits on Federal authority over waters. And
the states do regulate the waters under their jurisdiction.
Nebraska takes its responsibilities to protect its natural
resources seriously.
    If you look around the country, you'll find that many of
the states are protecting their natural resources more
aggressively since the passage of the Clean Water Act in 1972.
    The proposed rule will have significant impacts on my
business. Construction projects rely on efficient, timely, and
consistent permitting procedures and review processes under the
Clean Water Act programs. An onerous permitting process could
delay projects which leads to greater risk and higher costs.
Also, more Federal permitting actions will trigger additional
statutory reviews by outside agencies under laws including the
Endangered Species Acts, the National Historic Prevention Act,
the National Environmental Policy Act. It's doubtful that these
agencies will have the equipment to handle these inflow of
additional permitting requests.
    I am uncertain of what the environmental benefits are
gained by this paperwork. But I am certain of the massive
delays of permittings that will result. The cost of obtaining
Clean Water Act permits range from close to 29,000 all the way
up to close to $272,000. Permitting delays will only increase
these costs and prevent me from expanding my business and in
hiring more employees.
    The agencies have not considered the unintended
consequences of this rule. Under this proposed rule, Low Impact
Development stormwater controls could be federally
jurisdictional. Many of our builders voluntarily select LID
controls, such as rain gardens and swells for the general
benefit of our communities. This rule would discourage these
voluntary projects if they require Federal permits.
    This proposed rule does not add new protections for our
Nation's water resources, it just shifts the regulatory
authority from the states to the Federal Government. The
proposed rule is inconsistent with previous Supreme Court
decision and expands the scope of waters to federally regulated
beyond what Congress envisioned. Any final rule should be
considered--or consistent with the Supreme Court's decisions,
provide understandable definitions, and preserve the
partnership between all levels of government. All are sorely
lacking here.
    I want to thank you for the opportunity to testify. And I
do look forward to any questions you may have, Senator. Thank
you.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Wisnieski follows:]


   [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


    Senator Fischer. Thank you, Don. I would like to welcome
Mr. John Crabtree. Mr. Crabtree is the Media Director for the
Center of Rural Affairs which has accomplished commendable work
on rural development opportunities throughout our State.
    I would note that, as is customary for the Senate
Environment and Public Works Committee hearings, we work in a
bipartisan manner to select witnesses. And with ranking member
Senator Barbara Boxer, our next two witnesses are Minority
witnesses.
    Mr. Crabtree, please begin your testimony when you are
ready.

              STATEMENT OF JOHN CRABTREE, CENTER
                  FOR RURAL AFFAIRS, LYONS, NE

    Mr. Crabtree. Thank you, Senator Fischer, and good morning.
And, yes, I thank the members of the Committee and the ranking
members and the staff for working with me to--to invite me
here. But I thank you for inviting me here, too. I really
appreciate you bringing this hearing to Nebraska.
    My name, as you said, is John Crabtree. I live and work in
the Northeast Nebraska small town of Lyons, population 851. I'm
testifying today on behalf of the Center for Rural Affairs
where I work as Media Director and rural public policy
advocate.
    Since its founding in 1973, the Center's resisted the role
of advocating for the interests of any particular group.
Instead, we've chosen to advance a set of values, values that
we believe reflect the best of rural and small town America.
And we deeply believe that water quality is one of those--that
clean water is one of those rural values.
    The need for this rulemaking process arises out of the
chaos, confusion and complexity surrounding Clean Water Act
enforcement as a result of Supreme Court decisions in 2001 and
2006. The proposed rule focuses on reducing that confusion, and
the Center for Rural Affairs is encouraged by the process so
far. We encourage the EPA and the Army Corp of Engineers to
continue moving this rulemaking process forward.
    It's worth clarifying that the Center is supportive of the
formal rulemaking process as it's provided the opportunity to
craft a stronger and more suitable rule through increased
citizen input and engagement. While no proposed rule is
perfect, we believe the rulemaking process will improve this
rule, which is why we provided detailed and substantive
comments to the EPA and Corps during the public commentary
period. And we believe that an improved rule can and should
reduce confusion and provide clarity for regulated entities,
including ranchers and farmers, and ultimately improve the
quality of the Nation's waters for the hundreds of us who
utilize and depend upon clean water from our rivers, lakes, and
streams.
    Clean water is vital to farming and ranching and small
towns. Water for livestock, irrigation, and other purposes is
crucial to the day-to-day operations of farms and ranches. And
farmers and ranchers are the tip of the spear when it comes to
preserving water quality in America because much of the surface
water of the U.S. falls first on American farms and ranches.
    Streams and wetlands create economic opportunity in small
town America through hunting, fishing, birding, recreation,
tourism, farming, ranching and small manufacturing. Farmers,
ranchers and America's small towns depend heavily on water and
our neighbors downstream count on us to preserve the quality of
that water for their use as well.
    Now, despite the assertions that underState the economic
benefit and vastly overState the cost of implementing this
proposed rule, the true cost of implementation is estimated to
range from 160 to 278 million. And according to multiple
econometric models, the estimated economic benefits of
implementing the proposed rule range from 390 to 510 million,
or likely double the costs.
    Clean water is crucial here in Nebraska too, of course. And
vulnerable surface waters are prevalent in Nebraska. EPA
estimates that 52 percent of Nebraska streams have no other
streams flowing into them, and that 77 percent do not flow
year-round. Under varying interpretations of the most recent
Supreme Court decision, these smaller water bodies are among
those for which the extent of Clean Water Act protections has
been questioned.
    EPA has also determined that 525,000 people in Nebraska
receive some of their drinking water from areas containing
these smaller streams and that at least 197 facilities located
on such streams currently have permits under the Clean Water
Act and other Federal statutes regulating pollution discharges.
In addition, the Nebraska Game and Parks Commission has
estimated that nearly 829,000 acres of wetlands in the State
could be considered so-called isolated waters particularly
vulnerable to losing those safeguards.
    The ``Waters of the U.S.'' rule is the product--excuse me,
I'm sorry, I lost my place there.
    Chief Justice Roberts has specifically said that rulemaking
would most likely be required to provide necessary
clarification of Clean Water Act jurisdiction. This has been a
rigorous rulemaking process. EPA and the Army Corps has
conducted extensive outreach to--as I said, conducted extensive
outreach and received close to one million public comments on
the proposed rule, including from the Center of Rural Affairs
and thousands of other organizations and hundreds and thousands
of individuals. An estimated 87 percent of those comments
support the rule.
    The ``Waters of the U.S.'' rule goes to great lengths to
ensure that farmers and ranchers benefit from preserving water
quality but are not overly burdened with the rule's
implementation. All the historical exclusions and exemptions
for farming and ranching are preserved, including those for
normal farming and ranching practices.
    And that means that dramatic rhetoric such as statements
that farmers and ranchers will need a permit to move cattle
across a wet field or stream are absolutely false. Likewise,
public statements that farm ponds would--by detractors is
supported by the--despite public statements to the contrary,
farm ponds would continue to fall under the longstanding
exemption for farm ponds in the Clean Water Act.
    In the final analysis, streams that only flow seasonally or
after rain have been protected by the Clean Water Act since it
was enacted in 1972. As well they should be, since more than 60
percent of streams nationwide do not flow year-round, and yet
those very same streams contribute to the drinking water for
117 million Americans.
    Again, I want to thank you, Senator, for having this
hearing and for inviting me here today.
    Just my closing statement, my last comment, here in the
west, we do understand that there's a lot of truth to the old
joke, whiskey is for drinking and water is for fighting. Water
is life, for people, crops, livestock, and wildlife as well as
farms, ranches, business and industry. It's in all our interest
to protect this most vital of our natural resources.
    We believe the EPA and Army Corps of Engineers should
continue to listen to concerns, make substantive improvements
to the rule, and then move forward to finalization. Thank you.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Crabtree follows:]


   [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Fischer. Thank you, Mr. Crabtree.
    Next, Mr. Wesley Sheets will be a witness for the Minority
as well. Wes is the Nebraska National Director and served on
the National Executive Board of the Izaak Walton League of
America. Mr. Sheets worked for 32 years for the Nebraska Game
and Parks Commission, and I thank him for his service to
Nebraska.
    So welcome, Wes. And your testimony, please.

   STATEMENT OF WESLEY F. SHEETS, EXECUTIVE BOARD MEMBER AND
   NEBRASKA NATIONAL DIRECTOR, IZAAK WALTON LEAGUE OF AMERICA

    Mr. Sheets . Thank you, Senator Fischer, and members and
staff of the Committee on Environment and Public Works. I thank
you for the opportunity to provide comments here today.
    My name is Wes Sheets, and I do live here in Lincoln,
Nebraska. I am testifying on behalf of the Izaak Walton League
of America, which is one of the Nation's oldest recreational
and conservation organizations. The Izaak Walton League was
formed back in 1922 by a group of outdoor specialists that were
concerned with the water pollution impacting the health of our
fish and wildlife and other natural resources. The founders of
our organization understood that clean water and healthy
wetlands are essential to robust populations of fish, and
ducks, and other wildlife and, in turn--aha--and, in turn, to
enjoyable and successful days in the field pursuing them.
    I am active in all levels of the Izaak Walton League, as
the treasurer of the local chapter, as the--I'm the national
director for Nebraska, and I recently became a member of the
League's executive board. Today I'm representing our nearly
2,000 members here in Nebraska and our other 45,000 members
across the Nation. Our members are all from outdoor enthusiasts
who hunt, fish, and participate in recreational shooting,
boating, and many other outdoor activities.
    My working career that Senator Fischer alluded to, I spent
32 years with the Nebraska Game and Parks Commission as a
fisheries biologist, aquatic scientist, and finally finishing
the career as the Agency Assistant Director for fisheries,
wildlife and law enforcement. I was very privileged back in the
early 1970's and mid 1970's to participate as an agency
representative as the State of Nebraska began the establishment
of its first water quality criteria standards under the newly
passed Nebraska Environmental Protection Act.
    It was a treat to see Senator Smith here in the audience
this morning, and I thank him for helping get that process
started.
    I do want to start by acknowledging the interests and
concerns of all my colleagues who are testifying here in
opposition to this rule. The Izaak Walton League has a long
history of working with farmers and ranchers, as well as other
industries, on solutions for the conservation issues and we
pledge to continue to do so.
    League members are members--are farmers and ranchers, or
they are employed by other industries represented here. And
many of us come from rural and agricultural communities. I
myself grew up on a dairy farm down in our neighboring State to
the south.
    We recognize the importance of clean water, as I hope
everyone in this room also does. Clean water is fundamentally
essential to all life, from humans, to wildlife, to fish and
plants. Congress has charged the Environmental Protection
Agency with cleaning up America's waters and with keeping it
clean. To State the obvious, water flows downstream and can
carry sediment, nutrients, and other pollutants with it. There
is no line in the watershed above which water and pollutants do
not flow downstream, at least to my knowledge. If landowners
and businesses below some arbitrary line in the watershed of
connected waters would be required to contribute to clean
waters, while those above the arbitrary line could send
sediments, nutrients and other articles downstream without
concern for those impacts, those living upstream would
certainly have an unfair and unnecessary economic advantage, I
would submit.
    This highlights the current confusion, and that is also why
so many groups have asked the agencies for a clarifying ruling.
Science is irrefutable that watershed waters are considered in
the rules that are connected. All waters are important, and
that includes the ephemeral waters that do not flow all year
long perhaps. The rule is important to Nebraskans for very many
reasons, not the least of which is the maintenance of fisheries
and wildlife habitat, flooding mitigation, water-based
recreation, industrial need, and many more life needs. Drinking
water tops the many lists. And John just recounted some of the
statistics that I wanted to use about how many folks depend on
our stream water supplies for their drinking water.
    Clean water is exactly the type of issue where a Federal
rulemakes particular sense. The vast majority of U.S. waters
are part of an interState network that drains to one of the
oceans. What we put into upstream Nebraska waters affects not
only Nebraskans but it does affect the hunting and fishing
opportunities of people all the way down to Louisiana and into
the Gulf of Mexico.
    The muddying and pollution of waters directly hurts hunting
and fishing and all of the businesses that benefit from them.
Approximately 47 million hunters and anglers in Nebraska
generate over $200 billion in economic activity each year. The
rule needs to seek to clarify which waters are covered in this
endeavor, and making the process more efficient and effective,
and it is a better way to address the concerns about how the
Clean Water Act is applied.
    Nebraskans care as much about clean water and their
downstream neighbors as anyone else in the country, and we care
just as much about our traditions of fishing and hunting and
depend on clean water.
    Please give the agencies a chance to present a final rule.
    And I thank you for the opportunity, Senator, for being
present here today.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Sheets follows:]

    [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Fischer. Thank you, Wes. Good to see you. Finally,
I'm pleased to welcome our last witness, Mr. Don Blankenau. Mr.
Blankenau is a water and natural resources attorney whose
impressive career has enabled him to become a nationally
recognized water policy expert.
    Before we hear from Mr. Blankenau, I would tell you that
I'm entering into today's hearing record comments he filed on
behalf of the Nebraska Association of Resource Districts,
Nebraska League of Municipalities, and the Nebraska Groundwater
Management Coalition.
    Mr. Blankenau, thank you for testifying. You may begin when
ready.

 STATEMENT OF DON BLANKENAU, ATTORNEY FOR NEBRASKA ASSOCIATION
       OF RESOURCES DISTRICTS AND THE LEAGUE OF NEBRASKA
                         MUNICIPALITIES

    Mr. Blankenau. Thank you, Senator.
    Members of the Committee and staff, we appreciate the
opportunity to testify this morning.
    Again, my name is Don Blankenau, and I am an attorney based
in Lincoln, Nebraska specializing in water and natural
resources law. My practice has allowed me to engage in water
cases in the states of Nebraska, Arizona, North Dakota, South
Dakota, Missouri, Georgia, Florida and Alabama. I appear here
today to offer my thoughts regarding the proposed rule. My
colleague, Vanessa Silke, and I have previously filed formal
comments on behalf of this rule regarding compliance to include
the Nebraska Groundwater Management Coalition, the Nebraska
Association of Resources Districts, the League of Nebraska
Municipalities, and the Tri-Basin Natural Resources District
and the Lyman-Richey Corporation with the sand and gravel
mining operation. As you've noted, Senator, those comments are
included in the record today, but I'll offer some additional
comments.
    I'd like to begin with a brief anecdote that I think
highlights the philosophical perspective of the Federal
proponents of this rule. Some 4 years ago I was at a meeting
with the--with an employee of the Army Corps of Engineers when
we began a discussion concerning groundwater management. To my
surprise, this employee stated that it was time for the Federal
Government to assert more control over groundwater. I responded
to that statement with the observation that the U.S. Supreme
Court in a Nebraska case, Sporhase versus Nebraska, ex rel.
Douglas, in 1982, had determined that groundwater was an
article of interState commerce within the meaning of the
Constitution. And I went on to explain that as an article of
interState commerce, any increased Federal control was the sole
purview of Congress and could not be undertaken by an agency
absent expressed congressional authorization. The Corps
employee simply responded, we can do a lot with our rules, and
if Congress won't act, we will. The proposed rule I think is
the product of that kind of thinking.
    Whether a rule is good policy is one question. Whether it's
legal is another. And in my view, this proposed rule is
neither. Article 1, Section 8, Clause 3 of the Constitution of
the United States contains the ``commerce clause'' that
authorizes Congress alone to make laws governing interState
commerce. Historically, it was the interState trafficking of
goods and services on the Nation's interState waters that
served as the legal lynchpin to congressional control over
those waters. In other words, Congress only had the authority
over navigable waters to the extent those waters served as
conduits of commerce. It is in this context and under this
authority that Congress adopted the Clean Water Act and
expressly limited its reach to navigable waters. In the decades
that have passed since its passage, the reach of the EPA and
the Corps has broadened as those two agencies extended the
definition of the term ``navigable waters.'' Contrary to the
assertions of its proponents, the proposed rule does not merely
codify existing judicial interpretations of navigable waters,
it affirmatively extends and expands the meaning to create
Federal controls that go far beyond what Congress intended when
it adopted the Clean Water Act.
    The proposed rule defines water as navigable if it has a
hydrologic groundwater connection to a navigable stream. So
while molecules of water in an excavation or pothole may be
miles from a stream or decades from ever impacting that stream,
the proposed rule defines them as navigable in place today. In
Nebraska, the groundwater is commonly hydrologically connected
to stream flow and can extend out many miles from the stream.
The proposed rule would therefore impact many thousands of
people more than the existing rule.
    Existing permit requirements under the Clean Water Act
already add a layer of Federal regulatory oversight on top of
the state-based regulatory scheme, and result in significant
cost increases and overall delay in the development process.
For example, due to limited staff support at the Corps' Omaha
District Office, individual permits under Section 404 currently
take up to 18 months to process. Permit costs typically range
between $25,000 and $100,000, accounting for legal, technical
and logistical costs. Engaging the Corps in the permit
application process is no guarantee that a permit will be
granted. In those instances where a permit is denied,
development of a property at its highest and best use is
effectively precluded. These costs, along with the uncertainty
of the permit approval process, will only increase under the
proposed rule's expansion of the scope of Federal jurisdiction
and will directly impinge upon land-use decisions at the State
and local level.
    Ultimately, the proposed rule stretches the definition of
navigable waters beyond credibility. Which is evidenced by the
nearly 1,000,000 negative comments that have been submitted.
The truth is, and this is important, there is no water quality
necessity that requires this kind of Federal intervention. None
at this time. There simply is no real problem this rule will
solve. Instead, the rule is just another example of the ever-
growing Federal erosion of State authority and ever-expanding
regulatory net.
    I urge the Committee to take all necessary action to ensure
the proposed rule does not become law. Thank you.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Blankenau follows:]

    [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


    Senator Fischer. Thank you,
    Mr. Blankenau.
    At the request of the Minority, I am entering the comments
from the Sierra Club Nebraska Chapter into our hearing record.
And at the request of my partner in the U.S. Senate, I am
entering into the record a statement from Senator Ben Sasse.
    I would like to thank all of the panel for your thoughtful
testimony. It's clear that you and the groups that you
represent all have a very strong appreciation for the
importance of clean water, and strong, healthy communities here
in State of Nebraska.
    There are clearly some major issues with the proposed rule
that would impact every corner of our State, and so I'd like to
open up the first question to the entire panel.
    In your view, how do we as Nebraskans best take care of our
precious water resources and how will this proposed rule impact
these important efforts? Is it a top down bureaucratic Federal
scheme? Is that--is that a help or is that a hindrance? And
we'll start with Commissioner, please.
    Ms. Borgeson. Thank you, Senator.
    We protect our water resources by using the best
construction practices and as--as we develop our communities.
And we use real water professional--resource professionals to
help us do that. The EPA and the Corps of Engineers have done a
great deal of good to improve the water quality. In general,
having an organization that can coordinate the clean-up of our
waters and work together to establish this goal would seem to
be a reasonable solution. But in speaking with our engineer
staff, they believe that the original concept, when properly
implemented, can--can be of help. But, unfortunately, they
believe that because of the inconsistencies in enforcement, and
the lack of clear definition of what is expected, has become
quite a hindrance. The problem that's developed is that many of
the individuals within the program seem to have forgotten that
this is a combined effort of all those involved to improve and
protect one of our most valuable resources. And so there has to
be consistency in the way the rule is administered, and that it
has to start with the clear and accurate definitions that are
interpreted by the regulators in a consistent manner.
    A top down bureaucratic Federal scheme would work best if
the rule--or regulation is written in a way to incentivize
communities rather than punish them. And then we--you know, if
we're spending all of our resources on process, we're spending
less on--and directly, on things that would impact and
improving the water quality.
    Senator Fischer. Thank you.
    Ms. Cooksley, your thoughts, please?
    Ms. Cooksley. Thank you. I'd like to answer that last
question first, would it be a help or a hindrance. In my view,
it would a hindrance to have a Federal top down. And the reason
being, as a private landowner, I am on the land every day. I
depend on that land to be managed properly to sustain the--the
grass on the sand dunes which provides wildlife habitat and
food for the cattle. Our family has been on that ranch for over
a hundred years. Having local management makes more sense. We
see impacts more immediately and we can address those. And we
would like to see going forward that we develop relationships
with our agencies and that they provide incentives, not
regulations, and that they provide information, not burdens.
And so I would like to keep local management.
    Senator Fischer. Thank you.
    Mr. Wisnieski.
    Mr. Wisnieski. There's essentially a system in place at
this point with the Clean Water Act and, as developers and
builders, we're mostly voluntarily working on the State and
local levels with what that system is in place. So time and
money is not always of the essence on projects and stuff like
that. To raise costs and have more regulations upon us is just
such detriment. Twenty percent of a new home to date is
literally regulatory costs. So we can't allow that to be
increased with more regulations. So it's simply, leave the
system in place as is.
    Senator Fischer. Thank you.
    Mr. Crabtree.
    Mr. Crabtree. Well, thank you, Senator.
    I guess the first part of your question is--I'll take that
first. Just about everybody up here has mentioned the concern
about the uncertainty about jurisdiction in Clean Water Act
under the rule but, of course, there's much uncertainty that
exists in Clean Water Act enforcement today that was created by
the Supreme Court decisions that sort of put the system in find
kind of a--in a bit of flux. That uncertainty really does
detract from our ability to effectively enforce the Act and
protect the ``Waters of the U.S.'' So, you know, my testimony I
mentioned, just to reiterate, the Supreme Court, including
Chief Justice, have said we're probably going to need
rulemaking to clear up these jurisdictional definitions. I, and
I must say, continuing to have dialogs like this on what's
vitally important because I don't believe that any one person
or any one agency is going to absolutely get this right. We
don't believe the rule is perfect in its drafting. We had
critical comments and supportive comments. But we are in a
situation of great uncertainty today in enforcing the Clean
Water Act. And so rulemaking that clears up those
jurisdictional questions is necessary. It's not simply a matter
of the status quo, because that was--the status quo that
existed for 20 or 30 years has largely been absent for the last
ten because of those Supreme Court decisions. And as far as,
you know, how do we best do this, I think we draw on the things
that we do best. We talk to each other, even when we disagree.
The Center for Rural Affairs has had a long history of working
with farmers and ranchers and conservation programs, Federal
and State conservation programs, to help people--to help
provide incentives for people to do things that improve water
quality without a regulatory process. But, again, through
conservation and stewardship. That's what we do I think best,
and that's why the rule, I think, is supportable in that it
creates all the--it reenforces all the exemptions that exist
for farming in the Act previously.
    Senator Fischer. Thank you.
    Mr. Sheets.
    Mr. Sheets. Thank you, Senator. Obviously, the folks that I
represent are basically users of water, and water quality is
very important. We've all talked about the confusion of the
existing situation and I think that's the nemesis of what we
face. The best solution to me is not to border on a top down or
a bottom up answer to this dilemma. I think it really borders
on working together in a compromise to find an immediate
solution where probably everybody is a bit upset but we all win
in the final analysis. So, you know, I think organizations need
the opportunity to voice their opinions. I think the regulators
need to develop pertinent and intelligent responses to those
comments, and in final analysis maybe will come to a better
understanding of what it is we want to accomplish and how we're
going to get there. The process needs to continue on and--no
question in my mind.
    Senator Fischer. Thank you.
    And Mr. Blankenau.
    Mr. Blankenau. Thank you, Senator.
    You know, frankly, my testimony in opposition to this rule
here today is against my personal interests because as a lawyer
I can guarantee you I will make money if this rule passes.
    I think it's always bad policy if a State or Federal agency
by rule usurps the role of the legislature. That's what's
occurring here. The legislature specified that the waters that
are to be impacted are those that are, in fact, navigable. The
geographic extent that this rule will reach out is so
significant that only the legislature should step in and deal
with that kind of expansion. So I do think it is bad policy in
this instance, and I do think it's illegal, and clearly against
the Constitution.
    And I would go back to some previous statements. I'm sure
everyone in this rooms believes that it's important that we
maintain clean water. That's not really what's at issue with
this rule. There are no present water quality concerns that
this rule will address. This is rather about control of the
individuals and development. And I would urge the Committee to
do what they can to quell this rule.
    Senator Fischer. Thank you,
    Mr. Blankenau.
    Commissioner Borgeson, I have a few questions for you,
please.
    In your testimony you spoke about the efforts in Omaha to
address the combined sewer overflows to improve the water
quality of the Missouri River. And that is going to be a very
expensive undertaking. I think it's estimated to cost the
citizens approximately $2 billion. Omaha is going to--
increasing their rates. I've heard about that, as I'm sure you
have as well. And that's a, really a burden on families and
especially some of the poorest communities within the city of
Omaha. I understand that green solutions are being proposed as
part of that solution to the challenge, but this proposed rule
that we're talking about right now, it's really a potential
threat, I think, to the government's ability to maintain those
facilities in the future without having to go through this
permitting program that we're talking about. Do you agree with
that? Can you kind of speak to that problem that Omaha may be
facing when it looks at green solutions to such a costly
problem that they're facing and their citizens are being--are
having to pay for?
    Ms. Borgeson. Yes. The one project in Douglas County, Omaha
is the example of one of our combined elementary schools. The
name is Saddlebrook, and it's an elementary school, it's a
library, and it's a community center, and it has a green roof.
And it catches all of the rain and it keeps it from getting
diverted onto the parking lots and then into the storm sewers.
And then it adds a great deal of insulation to the building as
well. Pretty--pretty neat project. But no one knows for certain
what the possible consequences are of the new rules and how
that--they will affect projects such as these. The Board could
claim jurisdiction over these green solutions. So the concern
of the new regulations is if these special permits are required
for some of these things, what will it cost, what will the
length be between the time that, you know, were intended to do
the construction and actually getting the permit, and what
other controls on the surrounding project will the permit want
to exert. So, you know, again, it's essential that the proposed
WOTUS rule does not negatively impact the use of green
infrastructure, both from the installation and the ongoing
maintenance on a standpoint of the project.
    Senator Fischer. You know, I hear from citizens, I hear
from business people, I hear from government, local government,
State government, about frustrations with regulations that the
Federal Government mandates and is passed down and that we all
then have to deal with. But I can tell you, the example you
gave about 180th Street in your testimony, that has to be at
the top of my list on really frustration that's out there and
the time involved and the cost that's involved. How exactly do
you think this proposed rule is going to further exacerbate
that problem?
    Ms. Borgeson. Well, first of all, the--I want to compliment
you on the Build Nebraska Act, the LB 84, because it's been an
absolute tremendous help to both the State and the local and
funding projects to improve the transportation needs. And we
are very, very appreciative of that.
    But the major problem is the rules are not applied
consistently. Primarily the lack of insufficient definition,
use of terminology and, of course, you run into different
personalities. The term that--terms that are already a problem
are still not clearly defined in the new rules. Plus, the new
terms are being added that obviously extend the control of EPA
and the Corps of Engineers over both government right-of-way
but farther and farther into private land. And so the 80th
Street--180th Street project is a great example, you know, of
both ends of the cooperation spectrum. The--our engineer's
office met informally with the Corps of Engineers, the primary
enforcers of the Clean Water Act, to discuss the project. And
at that meaning the Corps would not give any formal opinion but
did take suggestions about the bridge design and the location
of the two major bridges that would be acceptable so that we
could avoid some problems with an active stream. Well, these
suggestions were incorporated into our original design, but as
the design work continued we suddenly started to have problems
with that rut at the bottom of the ditch that, again, was eight
inches long and an inch deep. And so the latest construction
date that we have is 2018, or Fiscal Year 2019, and the
original start date, again, was 2010, and it was at a cost of
about $20 million. So just to put it in perspective, assuming
that a 3-percent increase in construction costs per year, and a
30 percent cost increase due to required changes, that have
nothing to do with the primary ``Waters of the U.S.,'' or the
historical highway that's--that it's going over, the project
and the time value money on the increased cost is now estimated
to be a minimum of $36 million. And that's--and a large of it
is paid for by--a large percentage is paid for by the Federal
highway. But it's all taxpayer money. And so, of course, you
know, we're--we're affected by it, so . . .
    Senator Fischer. You know, when you talk about the
regulations that counties are under, cities are under, you
spoke in your testimony about once that a project is deemed to
be under Federal jurisdiction then other Federal requirements
kick in as well with NEPA, the National Environmental Policy
Act, with, of course, endangered species, has an affect on that
as well. I would assume then that adds additional time,
additional cost to taxpayers, is that--is that correct?
    Ms. Borgeson. Yes, it does. I mean, it means, again, a lot
more time and a lot more additional paperwork and expense. And
a good example, again, is the 180th Street project because
that----
    Senator Fischer. That's like the poster child.
    Ms. Borgeson. Yes. Because the state--well, the State
Historical Society insisted that our initial plan for the two
900-foot bridges that span the Old Lincoln Highway--and, again,
that's a piece of the national historic highway, and we're very
proud of that, but that--and we have spent hundreds and
thousands of dollars to maintain that because of its historical
value, but--and the West Papio Creek and the railroad tracks,
they insisted that those be changed to include a historical
consistent design to go along the Old Lincoln Highway. So, in
simple terms, for a county this means additional time,
additional expense, is added to each one of these projects
and--and more so just even in--a big concern is even in our
routine maintenance that may fall under these Federal
jurisdictions just because the water may drain through county
ditches into waterways. So we're very, very concerned about
that.
    Senator Fischer. As I think all counties are. I don't
remember my exact numbers on this, but we look at the State
highway system and the thousands of miles of road, well, here
in Nebraska we have about ten times, I think, the county roads
that have to be maintained as well. So I can appreciate the
cost to citizens in this State to maintain the production and
the problems they're going to be facing now in the future.
    Ms. Borgeson. Absolutely.
    Senator Fischer. And so thank you very much.
    Ms. Cooksley, I wanted to ask you a question, and if you
could kind of clear something up. You know, a lot of times what
we hear the most about this proposed rule and the idea that EPA
and the Corps now would be regulating ditches under that
proposed rule. And some agencies are saying, well, that's not
true, ditches are going to be exempted. But I continue to hear,
really, uncertainty and some certainty that those ditches are
going to be included under the rule. Can you address that for
us?
    Ms. Cooksley. I will try.
    The rule does say that ditches are exempt. But it's very
vague to us that read it. It excludes ditches that are
excavated wholly on uplands, drain only uplands, and have less
than perennial flow. When I go up on an upland, to me that's
higher than lower ground. That ditch also had to occur through
water, a perennial flow. The term ``upland'' was not defined
further, so we're still in a fog on what does that mean. It
does not exempt ditches that do not contribute flow either
directly or through another water to navigable waters or
tributaries. And to qualify for an exclusion a ditch must
contribute zero flow to navigable water tributaries. And since
most ditches that I know of convey water somewhere indirectly
or directly to minor tributaries, it has no benefit. It muddies
the water, so to speak, to us trying to understand and work
within this rule.
    Senator Fischer. What about floodplains and regulation of
floodplains, do you have thoughts on how this proposed rule
would affect that?
    Ms. Cooksley. The proposal would make everything within the
floodplain and a repairing area a Federal water by considering
that adjacent waters. And it fails to define how far a
repairing area goes, which is the area around the water body.
It doesn't distinguish flood intervals. And perhaps the most
concerning to me is the rule says, best professional judgment
by regulators to be used on a case-by-case basis. That allows
me no flexibility to plan. How can I get ready for this? How do
I manage this? So, again, we're back to the uncertainty.
    Senator Fischer. And I know that you and your family have a
wonderful history of conservation and in taking care of your
land and using those best management practices. How do you
think--how do you think you're going to be affected when you
try to follow the state-approved best management practices that
truly affect the environment that you live in if this rule
takes effect as it's proposing?
    Ms. Cooksley. If it takes away the certainty from the State
in managing the waters, and I have used their guidelines, then
that puts me, as a private landowner, as a land manager, at
risk. Such as Mr. Blankenau had said, if their--if the State
authority is taken away, then, again, I am uncertain as to what
I can and cannot do. And I am out there trying to do the right
thing every day.
    Senator Fischer. You know, you keep mentioning uncertainty.
And I guess I would ask you, how do you define that? What do
you mean by uncertainty with this rule, and what kind of impact
does this uncertainty that you talk about, what impact does
that have on your planning and on your management? I guess I
want to dive down a little deeper there into what you're
saying.
    Ms. Cooksley. In ranching, a short-term goal may be 5
years. A long-term goal may be the next generation. So we're
looking a long ways down. We do need certainty. We need to
know, is this depression, pond, a wetland that appears,
disappears? Is that going to be regulated by the Federal
Government; will it not be? Will it be regulated by the state;
will it not be? I have to be able to plan management of that
native Sandhills grass for the long term, which is into the
next generation. So we need clear definitions and clear
guidelines. And it gets back to certainty.
    Senator Fischer. Thank you. Don, I've got a couple
questions for you as a home builder. You know, that's an
American dream for people to be able to own their own home.
I've--I truly was shocked to hear when you said that 25 percent
of the cost of a home is because of regulation. That just
delays, I think, the American dream for our citizens.
    When you look at those permitting delays, how does that
affect you as a builder?
    Mr. Wisnieski. Well, as the saying goes, time is money.
Things have to move along pretty good. You know, if you go--if
you're working with a bank for loans, those are typically going
to start happening within a 6-month period. If you have a Clean
Water Act wetland permit or something like that is proposed
it's supposed to be in a timely manner. So you--we rely on that
to be on a timely manner. And too many times this takes months
or even years for that to be processed and get done. There was
a 2002 study that was cited by the EPA in its economic analysis
that the proposed rule found that an individual Clean Water Act
wetland permit takes an average, now this is an average, of 788
days. That years. That's a long time. And a so-called stream
wide, nationwide permit can take an average 313 days. Very
close to a year. And without proper--as a developer or builder,
without the proper permits in place, or not knowing if you have
those all--those permits all in place, it's a great risk of
running of fines, that we're aware of, up to $37,500 in a day,
so . . . And keeping in mind, the bank's continually knocking.
So that has to--that has to keep going.
    The big fear is, in a lot of communities across the State,
with shortage of housing, shortage of builders, work force,
developers, the big fear is too many of those individuals are
going to throw their hands up in the air and say, I don't need
to deal with it. It compounds the problem that we're already
facing. We can't go that direction. It needs to be streamlined.
It needs to be timely. It needs to be consistent. So hopefully
that answers that.
    Senator Fischer. It did.
    And home builders, I know that sometimes you have to obtain
those permits, Section 402 and 404, for you to complete your
projects. What exactly are those and what do you have to follow
in order to have those permits included?
    Mr. Wisnieski. The matrix behind each one of those is very
difficult in its own way. In essence, the 402 is basically
storm water related; the 404 is going to be your wetland
related. Keep in mind, I'm a small businessman, I like to grab
a hammer and build a house. I have to rely on the lawyers in
the community to help with these type of issues.
    Mr. Blankenau. God bless you.
    Senator Fischer. Too----
    Mr. Wisnieski. It's a money-making issue. But some of those
things that are, you know, involved with these are the pre-
application consultant--consultation consulting with these
folks. There's individual permit applications that have to be
submitted; there's public notifications; there's 15, 30-day
public notice comments, and so on and so forth, that have to be
done; opportunity for public hearings; there's Corps reviews;
the public comments and evaluations for the permit
applications; and finally the Corps' decision to make the
permit, or issue it or deny it. So there's--the answer to that
is actually pretty long if we want to get into it. I would
rather get you information on that.
    Senator Fischer. OK.
    Mr. Wisnieski. And provide that at a later date because we
could go on literally for an hour on this. So if I could be
allowed.
    Senator Fischer. OK.
    Mr. Wisnieski. I have a lot of information that I'd love to
get to you.
    Senator Fischer. Thank you. I look forward to receiving
that.
    Can you tell me, in your testimony you were talking about
any waters or wetlands within a floodplain, that they could be
subject to the Clean Water Act, their jurisdiction there. How
does that affect home builders? I've--I heard from people all
across the State, mostly in the eastern part of the State
though, that have really deep concerns about being in a
floodplain and what's all involved in that. Can you give us a
little information on that, please?
    Mr. Wisnieski. Yes. Floodplain is vaguely defined and will
result in unpredictable and inconsistent applications as far as
the Act.
    Do I need to get closer? Just holler at me next time.
    A landowner's not able to look at a map and objectively
know exactly the extent of those floodplains. That's probably
the biggest problem. If you look at his property, at his or her
property, and it's--you've got to decide whether you want to
even purchase that property because you don't know how far
those extensions actually reach out. It's just difficult to
know where those boundaries are. And it makes it difficult. Is
that my responsibility; is it the homeowner's responsibility;
the developer's responsibility? So on and so forth. Or we have
to wait for a field inspector to come out in the--and walk the
property and subjectively determine this is where it's going to
or not going to go. So it's a big issue that way.
    Senator Fischer. OK. And we heard the Commissioner talk
about green projects and, you know, that's--that's so important
that we--that we look at what's available and how we can move
to more green projects. And I know there's some--there's some
states and localities that require or encourage home builders
to start building more of the low-impact development, these
green projects that are out there. You heard the Commissioner's
answer on some of the issues that counties, cities, deal with.
What about home builders and, you know, people who want to move
in that direction and then when they're building a home and
what--what are you faced with on that?
    Mr. Wisnieski. Well, as I said earlier----
    Senator Fischer. Or what do you think you're going to be
faced with?
    Mr. Wisnieski. Well, it's more of a fear than anything. As
I stated in the testimony, a lot of the developers or builders
are voluntarily doing those type of deals, whether we put
swales in, whether we put water gardens, or whatever you want
to call them, in. But if a rain garden develops wetland plants
or vegetation and soils and happens to fall within a floodplain
or a nearby river or stream, and a landowner, he wants to do
something with it, if he has to dredge those out or maintain
them--now, typically that's the backyards of a lot people--you
know, a lot of folks' homes--not knowing what he can or can't
do to that, and if you start to remove soils from there to
maintain that, or pesticides for any kind of controls for
whatever that might be, there's going to be a lot of fines or
uncertainty what you can and can't do to those areas. We'll
stop putting them in, and that's not what we want to do. We do
want to control that. They serve a great purpose. And on a
voluntary basis, or on a local level that or we work with State
or local levels to do that, that's a great option and we want
to keep doing those. We don't want to eliminate folks from
doing those because they're going to have a hard time
maintaining them. Or the length of time to get a permit to do
that, now they're over-silted or whatever the case might be. So
it's an issue.
    Senator Fischer. Right. Thank you. Thank you very much.
    Mr. Crabtree, you stated that 80--I think I heard you
correctly, that 87 percent of the total comments support the
proposed rule. However, it's my understanding that the bulk of
these comments were not substantive and they did not evaluate
the content of the rule. In fact, as Secretary Darcy stated
publicly, out of the comments that the agencies classify as
substantive, 58 percent of those oppose the rule. Were you
aware of Secretary Darcy's statements?
    Mr. Crabtree. Yes, Senator. Actually, I think I had that in
the written testimony that I submitted to the Committee. And I
apologize for not emphasizing it.
    Yes, I think you're right, I think that that's probably the
case. And, I mean, I think we should also be careful because,
for example, the substantive comments that the Center for Rural
Affairs provided, which I was involved in drafting, had
multiple criticisms. But they were detailed and specific. And
the overarching, you know, I don't know, tenor of it was that
we--we think that we're moving in the right direction. That
they should continue. Now, I don't know how we would count
that. I don't know if we're in 58 percent or the 42 percent. So
I would assume that we're, you know, what they thought was
appropriate. But, honestly, I can't tell you. So that--I'm
not--I'm not dis--I don't find that matter too disconcerting
but it is worthy of wondering about. But I still believe, even
though that--because the difference between a substantive
comment, a comment which they call substantive, which, you
know, actually comments on a specific element of the rule,
versus a statement by an individual citizen who says something
that's not specifically detailed but says, I support this rule,
I mean, I think there's still value in that too. So I think
that 87 percent number is still pretty remarkable. Involves a
lot of people in this country, said, we think doing this to
protect water quality is important.
    Senator Fischer. I think it's also important that we base
public policy that will affect the citizens of our State and
the citizens of this country on fact and based on science. I
always appreciate comments from constituents, but policy has to
be based on fact.
    So I am going to put Secretary Darcy, her letter that she
sent to the House with those numbers in it into today's hearing
record. So thank you.
    Mr. Blankenau, in your comments you State that Section 404
permits can take up to 18 months to process by the Corps' Omaha
District Office and the costs can range from 25,000 to a
hundred thousand dollars. You know, this is a serious delay,
and it's expensive. So we kind of brought it up earlier about
what kind of activities are required under that permit. I'd
like to know, too, what's going to be required under the
proposed rule that you think. And that wait time then, is it
going to be more than 18 months? You know, I--we always hear
the horror stories about the permitting process and how long it
takes. So what, I guess, what do you see for the future here?
    Mr. Blankenau. Well, if the proposed rule does become law,
I think it extends the geographic regulatory reach of those
agencies. And, as a result, I think it will require more and
more permits to be issued. If the Corps' office is already
stretched by personnel, and I think they are, I think many of
them are hard-working, diligent Federal employees, but if
they're already stretched, if their workload increases, I don't
see how it can do anything but increase these delays and the
costs.
    Senator Fischer. The Regulatory Flexibility Act, it
requires agencies to examine the impacts of the proposed
regulation on small governmental entities and on small
businesses. The EPA and the Corps have certified that this
proposed rule will not have significant economic impacts on a
substantial number of small entities. But the chief counsel for
the Small Business Administration Office of Advocacy, and that
is a unit of the Federal Government, determined that this
certification was in error and that it was improper. Can you
talk about the EPA and the Corps' actions that I believe
undermine the safeguards we have for our Nebraska
municipalities and for the protection of our citizens?
    Mr. Blankenau. Yes. I think their certification was the
product of the narrative that it doesn't change existing law.
And I think the Small Business Administration recognized that
it, in fact, does change existing law. And further extends that
geographic reach. Now, all but two of Nebraska's 530
municipalities and all of its Natural Resources Districts would
qualify as small entities. Those municipalities and NRDs are
among the most frequently recipients of 404 permits because of
how much earth they move and all the activities that are
involved. I think what you'll see is direct impacts to
taxpayers as a result of those activities being delayed and
additional processing costs.
    Senator Fischer. And I would like you to speak to the
proposed rule's justification to regulate all the water that
has a hydraulic connection. I think you have a very unique
perspective because of your profession, because of your
positions that you've held in a previous life, so I think you
have a really good perspective to share with us how the water
here in Nebraska, and specifically that connection that we
have, how is that going to be affected?
    Mr. Blankenau. Well, it's interesting because both the
Corps and the EPA have previously disavowed any control over
groundwater. But what they've done by adding the hydrologic
connection component, is effectively used groundwater to claim
jurisdiction over discreet bodies of water that might be many
miles away. So, for instance, you know, I'll use the area that
you were from, Senator, as an example. You might have a golf
course developer who wishes to create a water feature and
excavates a pond which exposes groundwater that might be
hydrologically connected to the Dismal River some five miles
away by that act of exposing and creating that exposure to
groundwater, there's that hydrologic connection which makes
that newly excavated pond now jurisdictional. So while it's
technically correct that the proposed rule doesn't regulate
groundwater, they use that hydrologic connection of groundwater
as the lynchpin to jurisdiction.
    Senator Fischer. And the Clean Water Act's purpose is to
protect the quality of our navigable water; is that correct?
    Mr. Blankenau. That's correct.
    Senator Fischer. And do you see this proposed rulemaking as
expanding agencies' jurisdiction then, do you think? You
alluded to it, but I know attorneys don't ever come right out
and say it, but . . .
    Mr. Blankenau. I don't want to beat around the bush of it.
    Senator Fischer. But, you know, the--I'm very concerned
about the regulatory authority that we may see coming because
of this proposed rule.
    Mr. Blankenau. Well, again, and I really am concerned about
what this does to the fabric of the Constitution. The authority
of Congress is actually limited in what it can regulate. And it
has historically been limited to actual navigation on waters.
That was the whole purpose of the commerce clause being
inserted in the Constitution to begin with. What we've done
here is allowed an agency to define what ``navigable'' is and
extend it to molecules of water that are very distant in time
and in place. And I think that stretches the credibility beyond
the breaking point.
    Senator Fischer. You know, this time of year we see the
Sandhill crane coming to Nebraska and we have the opportunity
as Nebraskans to really enjoy that phenomenon that's out there.
But we also have a number of people from around the United
States, around the world, that come to view the cranes this
time of year. Can you explain how this rule, I think, is
attempting to use these birds----
    Mr. Blankenau. Yes.
    Senator Fischer. --to expand that Federal control over
isolated water?
    Mr. Blankenau. You've put your finger on one of the really
odd things about the proposed rule, and it's the resurrection,
if you will, of the Migratory Bird Rule, which I thought the
Supreme Court had placed a stake through the heart of in its
SWANCC decision. This rule effectively resurrects that concept
where if a migratory bird, such as the Sandhill crane, stops at
a pond or pothole along the way for a visit, that pond or
pothole becomes jurisdictional, all the way from Texas to North
Dakota.
    Senator Fischer. Or Anselmo, Nebraska.
    Mr. Blankenau. Or in Anselmo.
    So, yes, it's one of the real stretches, if you will, of a
definition of what navigable waters are.
    Senator Fischer. OK. Thank you.
    I have some questions for all of the witnesses. So I
welcome any of you that would like to address these.
    We'll begin with, do you believe that this proposed rule
will clear up confusion regarding the jurisdiction of the Clean
Water Act or do you think it will add to the confusion? You
know, we've heard, I think, all of you bring that up in your
testimony and in your comments.
    Commissioner, would you like to address that?
    Ms. Borgeson. Well, we believe it will, and does, add
confusion and it's not defined properly. You know, in terms of
counties, we do two basic routine maintenance tasks that all
counties do. We--the cleaning and repairing of roadside ditches
and the ongoing maintenance of unimproved roads. And so it's
imperative and, again, it's just not clear, as to whether or
not that routine maintenance of those right-of-ways and those
ditches are included in the needs of these permits. We believe
that the new rule does say that we would be, as counties,
required to get permits for those ditches. In fact in the EPA's
video it says in it several times about how important it is for
them to have control of the ditches. And so we're very
concerned, again, of the length Mr. Crabtree talked about of
already overworked workers in the agencies, this just
exacerbates it. And, again, it's just very unfair.
    Senator Fischer. OK. Thank you.
    Ms. Cooksley.
    Ms. Cooksley. I too feel it would be burdensome. It does
not clarify. Every day I have to go out on the land, I need to
be able to know what it is that I can do, because I am going
out there to manage the land for the long-term viability of the
land, keep the hills covered in grass, protect the wildlife,
that I enjoy every day, and still maintain a sustainable
business.
    Senator Fischer. Thank you.
    Don.
    Mr. Wisnieski. I don't have a whole lot to add to that.
I'll pass it on and let somebody else have the time.
    Senator Fischer. John.
    Mr. Crabtree. Senator, I actually really appreciate this
question because I think this is one of the heart--sort of the
heart of our discussion here. I absolutely respect that people
have concerns about what the rule is going to--what the rule
would do to--what jurisdiction of Clean Water Act would exist
after the finalization rule. And Don and Wes and I, indeed, all
of us on the panel probably all have six different viewpoints
on what exactly that jurisdiction should end up being finally.
The question about uncertainty though is a different question.
Whether or not it--some opponents of the rule have said, well,
the rule's unclear, it's--causes all these uncertainties, we
don't know what it means. But they also say that it expands
jurisdiction. It seems like, you know, a fairly precise
examination of it. I am the most troubled by the fact that the
uncertainty that we worry about exists today, currently. As
Miss Cooksley has very adequately described, ranchers and
farmers need certainty to make long-range plans. Ranching in
the Sandhills is a long-term venture. It's not something you do
this year and stop next year. I mean, it's a life commitment
and it requires that kind of certainty. But that doesn't exist
today. And from the Supreme Court Justice all the way down to
little old me, people have said that we're going to have to
define what's jurisdiction in order to provide that certainty.
    Now, we all--many of us want to quibble, and reasonably so,
about, well, what should it be. And that's one question that we
should have that argument. But we also need to recognize the
uncertainty that people say they hear in the rule exists today,
and so they should hear it today too. We should also be talking
about, we need to do rulemaking like this, as the Chief Justice
said. Because if we don't, Barbara will still have that
uncertainty, and every other rancher out there will. It still
exists, what's jurisdictional, what can I do, what can't I. And
short of hiring an attorney, and potentially going to court and
all that to resolve those questions, they won't have an answer.
    And so that's what's important, in our minds, the Center
for Rural Affairs, in my mind, that's what's most important
about this rulemaking, is providing a definition that's clear
and certain. And, again, we're reasonable people, we're more
than happy to debate with the people about what exactly that
definition should look like, and I think we should continue to
debate that. But we have to get that question about would the
rule provide certainty? Yes, it would. It absolutely would. It
would provide certainty. That doesn't exist today.
    Senator Fischer. Thank you.
    Wes.
    Mr. Sheets. Thank you. I'll try and be very succinct and
say, yes, I do believe this rule would provide some certainty.
But I'd also qualify that by suggesting that my good friend and
counter-opponent on my panel here to my left, has expertise,
and I would hope that in the final analysis that the rule would
be promulgated or at least exposed or written in some final
form and then subjected to whatever analysis that is
appropriate to make the decision, whether it would work or not
and what the ultimate determinations would be. And at that
point then I would urge you, Senator, as a policymaker, to
consider whether that's good policy for our country or not. But
I'd like to see what has been typed down on paper before I
would want to commit to making it into the law.
    Senator Fischer. Thank you.
    And, Mr. Blankenau, you'll have the last word today.
    Mr. Blankenau. Oh, good.
    This past October, Justin Lavene and I had a case before
the U.S. Supreme Court, and while we were engaged in argument,
Justice Breyer made the observation that you could hardly find
nine people less qualified to decide a water case than the
Court. Which got a good laugh in the courtroom. But he,
frankly, makes a point. I mean, these are people that are not
schooled in hydrology, and making these kinds of decisions is
difficult. I think the way the proposed rule is presently
written it creates even more uncertainty than exists today.
John's absolutely right, there is uncertainty today and clarity
is necessary. But this rule, I think, pumps steroids into that
uncertainty rather than bring about some resolution. So I would
prefer, and I think what I'm hearing many of these panelists
say, is that the Corps and EPA go back to the drafting room
table and rework this and to try to do exactly what they set
out to do, and that's to provide that certainty.
    Senator Fischer. Thank you.
    As we wrap up the hearing this--today, this afternoon, I
want to again express my gratitude to each of the witnesses for
testifying today. We were privileged to hear a wide variety of
different Nebraska stakeholders who provided details on the
challenges families, businesses, communities will face if and
when the administration finalizes the proposed Waters of the
United States rule.
    We are blessed to have great water resources in this State,
and it is clear that this rule would only undermine the strong
work of our State, Natural Resource Districts, local
communities, and landowners in managing and protecting this
precious natural resource.
    I have serious concerns about the process that EPA and the
Corps used to draft this rule, and its disregard for states,
small businesses, and local authorities. It is clear that
imposing additional rules and permitting requirements on
farmers, small businesses, and local governments will only
create uncertainty, cause litigation and liability exposure,
and drive up the time and costs of important projects.
    I have and will continue to support every legislative
opportunity to force EPA and the Corps to withdraw this
dangerous proposal. We should not be in the business of
creating unnecessary regulations that generate more red tape.
Instead, we need to explore policy options that promote growth
and enable our job creators, communities, and especially our
families to prosper. In doing so, I look forward to utilizing
the insights provided by all the stakeholders at this meeting.
    And, again, I thank all of you for being here today. Thank
you.
    And, with that, the hearing is now adjourned.
    [Whereupon, at 12:12 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
    [Additional material submitted for the record follows.]

           Statement of Hon. Benjamin E. Sasse, U.S. Senator
                       from the State of Nebraska

    Senator Fischer, thank you for convening a hearing on this
topic in our great State and thank you for your leadership on
this important issue in Congress. Issues concerning the
expansion EPA's jurisdiction over additional waters in the
United States are absolutely critical to Nebraskans. To my
fellow Nebraskans, I would note that our State and the country
are very fortunate to have Senator Fischer serving on the
Environment and Public Works Committee in the U.S. Senate.
    She understands these issues as well as anyone in
Washington and is a relentless advocate for common sense in a
city that doesn't understand the challenges our farmers and
ranchers face. This Committee has jurisdiction over many
agencies that implement areas of Federal law that touch
industries throughout our state. The EPA is just one prominent
example of such an agency. The country will be the beneficiary
of Senator Fischer's leadership on this Committee because of
her deep experience in transportation, commerce, and
agriculture issues. I firmly believe my work on the Senate
Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry Committee will be informed
by her experience and counsel.
    Senator Fischer, thank you also for inviting these
Nebraskans here today to present testimony. I cannot think of a
better way for our State to contribute to a discussion of an
expansion of EPA's jurisdiction. To the witnesses, thank you in
advance for you preparation and contributions to this important
topic. Thank you also for your care for our State and national
waters. Federal law cannot hope to adequately protect our
waters without citizens who accept the responsibility of being
committed caretakers. Nebraskans are committed stewards of our
state's waters and those that wind their way through our great
country. They are also deeply committed to restoring control to
Nebraskans of environmental issues that are properly addressed
through State and local jurisdictions.
    As importantly, Nebraskans accept the responsibility and
embrace the challenges of directing our own affairs. As I
traveled Nebraska's 93 counties, I heard time and time again
from many expressing the view that good ideas and proper policy
is not the exclusive domain of Washington D.C. and the Federal
regulations that spring from the power unwisely concentrated
there. I look forward to reviewing the testimony submitted at
today's hearing and learning from it better ways to improve our
environment and ensure that we pass freedom and prosperity to
those in our State and beyond that will inherit our land,
water, and economic freedoms.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]



                                 [all]
