[Senate Hearing 114-36]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]





                                                         S. Hrg. 114-36

                         LEGAL IMPLICATIONS OF
                          THE CLEAN POWER PLAN

=======================================================================

                                HEARING

                               before the

                       SUBCOMMITTEE ON CLEAN AIR
                           AND NUCLEAR SAFETY

                                 of the

                              COMMITTEE ON
                      ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
                          UNITED STATES SENATE

                    ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

                             FIRST SESSION

                               __________

                              MAY 5, 2015

                               __________

  Printed for the use of the Committee on Environment and Public Works


 [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


       Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys

                               __________

                        U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

94-994 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
  For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
  Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
         DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
                          Washington, DC 20402-0001

















               COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS

                    ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS
                             FIRST SESSION

                  JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma, Chairman
DAVID VITTER, Louisiana              BARBARA BOXER, California
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming               THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho                    BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas               SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
JEFF SESSIONS, Alabama               JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi            KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND, New York
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska                CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota            EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska

                 Ryan Jackson, Majority Staff Director
               Bettina Poirier, Democratic Staff Director
                              ----------

              Subcommittee on Clean Air and Nuclear Safety

             SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia, Chairman
DAVID VITTER, Louisiana              THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming               BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho                    BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
JEFF SESSIONS, Alabama               SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi            JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska                EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma (ex        BARBARA BOXER, California (ex
    officio)                             officio)




















                            C O N T E N T S

                              ----------
                                                                   Page

                              MAY 5, 2015
                           OPENING STATEMENTS

Capito, Hon. Shelley Moore, U.S. Senator from the State of West
  Virginia.......................................................     1
Carper, Hon. Thomas R., U.S. Senator from the State of Delaware..     3
Inhofe, Hon. James M., U.S. Senator from the State of Oklahoma...     5
Cardin, Hon. Benjamin L., U.S. Senator from the State of
  Maryland, prepared statement...................................   275

                               WITNESSES

Morrisey, Hon. Patrick, Attorney General, State of West Virginia.     6
    Prepared statement...........................................     9
    Response to an additional question from Senator Whitehouse...    15
Pruitt, Hon. Scott, Attorney General, State of Oklahoma..........    15
    Prepared statement...........................................    18
    Response to an additional question from Senator Whitehouse...    23
Martella, Roger Jr., Partner, Sidley Austin, LLP.................    23
    Prepared statement...........................................    26
Speakes-Backman, Kelly, Maryland Public Service Commissioner,
  Chair, Board of Directors, RGGI................................    41
    Prepared statement...........................................    43
Heinzerling, Lisa, Professor, Georgetown University..............    52
    Prepared statement...........................................    54


                         LEGAL IMPLICATIONS OF
                          THE CLEAN POWER PLAN

                              ----------


                          TUESDAY, MAY 5, 2015

                               U.S. Senate,
         Committee on Environment and Public Works,
              Subcommittee on Clean Air and Nuclear Safety,
                                                    Washington, DC.
    The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:59 p.m. in room
406, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Shelley Moore Capito
(chairwoman of the committee) presiding.
    Present: Senators Capito, Carper, Barrasso, Crapo, Inhofe,
Cardin, Whitehouse, and Markey.

        OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO,
          U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF WEST VIRGINIA

    Senator Capito. I would like to thank everybody for being
here today. This is our first Clean Air and Nuclear Safety
Subcommittee hearing on the EPA's Clean Power Plan.
    I would like to thank all the witnesses for appearing
before us today and say a special thank you to my State's
attorney general, Patrick Morrisey, who has been leading the
national legal fight against this rule, which would have, we
believe, a devastating impact in our home State of West
Virginia. So thank you and thank you, Attorney General
Morrisey, for traveling across the mountain. Appreciate it.
    Back in February, in a full committee hearing in this room,
I asked EPA Acting Assistant Administrator Janet McCabe to
explain why the EPA did not hold a public hearing on its
proposed Clean Power Plan in the State of West Virginia, one of
those States very heavily impacted. Despite the large role that
coal has in our economy, in our electricity generation, and
despite the multiple invitations issued by me and many, many
others, Federal and State legislators, to have them come to our
State, she told me basically that public hearings were held
where people were ``comfortable.'' That response was
unacceptable to me then and to the people of my State.
    As Attorney General Morrisey will also point out in his
testimony, this rule will have a devastating impact on our
State, other coal-producing States, electricity ratepayers
across the Country, and the reliability of our grid.
    We know from nearly five decades of experience that the
Clean Air Act works best when implemented in the spirit of
cooperative federalism. When the Federal Government works with
the State as partners, we can and have improved our air
quality, protected our economy and the electricity grid at the
same time.
    However, the Clean Power Plan does none of this, in my
opinion. Instead, we have an EPA dictating to the States and
effectively micro-managing interstate electricity policy
decisions to a degree even the Agency admits is unprecedented.
This raises a broad array of legal issues and is quite simply
bad policy.
    As a result, many States, including West Virginia and
Oklahoma, whose attorneys general will be here today, have
raised grave concerns about the legality of the rule and the
implications for their citizens and ratepayers. In addition to
significant constitutional and other legal questions, States
have expressed concerns about the feasibility of EPA's proposed
requirements and the likely impacts on electricity costs and
reliability.
    At risk is the ability the States have always had to make
the decision about their electricity generation. West Virginia
has chosen to rely on coal to provide affordable and reliable
electricity for our consumers and businesses. Other States have
made different choices that best serve their citizens. But
under the Clean Power Plan, each State's electricity plan will
have to make EPA's criteria for reducing carbon dioxide
emissions and be approved by the EPA.
    Other EPA regulations like Utility MACT rule is already
contributing to rising electricity rates and growing concerns
about reliability. We have had testimony in this committee in
other hearings. With the economy still far from fully
recovered, the last thing job creators need is another
expensive regulation likely to drive up our energy prices. And
the last things our families and senior citizens need is to see
their electric bills continue to go up.
    Next week I will be introducing greenhouse gas legislation
with my colleagues that will preserve the proper balance of
State and Federal authority, help ensure reliable and
affordable electricity, and protect jobs and our economy. I
look forward to working with many colleagues on the committee
to advance this bill.
    I would also like to say anecdotally that throughout the
State of West Virginia we have such uncertainty and such
disappointment, I think, that our voices haven't been heard in
our State with the EPA coming to the State to listen, and we
don't feel that the calculation of the economic impact in our
communities has been fully explored, nor even taken into
consideration as we move forward with these rules.
    With that, I would like to yield to the ranking member,
Senator Carper, for an opening statement.
    [The prepared statement of Senator Capito follows:]

                Statement of Hon. Shelley Moore Capito,
              U.S. Senator from the State of West Virginia

    Thank you all for being here today for the first Clean Air
and Nuclear Safety Subcommittee hearing on EPA's Clean Power
Plan. I would like to thank all of our witnesses for appearing
before us today, and say a special thank you to my State's
Attorney General, Patrick Morrisey, who has been leading the
national legal fight against this rule, which would have such
devastating impacts on our home State of West Virginia.
    Back in February, in a full committee hearing in this room,
I asked EPA Acting Assistant Administrator Janet McCabe to
explain why the EPA did not hold a public hearing on its
proposed Clean Power Plan in West Virginia, despite the large
role coal has in our economy and our electricity generation,
and despite the multiple invitations by Federal and State
legislators.
    She told me public hearings were held where people were
``comfortable'' going. That response is unacceptable to me and
to the people of my State. As Attorney General Morrisey will
also point out in his testimony, this rule will have a
devastating impact on our State, other coal producing States,
electricity rate payers across the country and the reliability
of our grid.
    We know from nearly five decades of experience that the
Clean Air Act works best when implemented in the spirit of
cooperative federalism. When the Federal Government works with
the States as partners, we can, and have, improved air quality
and protected our economy and our electricity grid at the same
time.
    However, the Clean Power Plan does none of this. Instead,
we have EPA dictating to States and effectively micromanaging
intrastate electricity policy decisions to a degree even the
agency admits is unprecedented. This raises a broad array of
legal issues and is, quite simply, bad policy.
    As a result, many States--including West Virginia and
Oklahoma, whose Attorneys General we will be hearing from
today--have raised grave concerns about the legality of the
rule and the implications for their citizens and ratepayers. In
addition to significant constitutional and other legal
questions, States have expressed concerns about the feasibility
of EPA's proposed requirements and the likely impacts on
electricity costs and reliability.
    At risk is the ability that States have always had to make
decisions about their electricity generation. West Virginia has
chosen to rely on coal to provide affordable and reliable
electricity for our consumers and businesses. As a result, we
have some of the lowest electricity rates in the Nation. Other
States make different choices that best serve their citizens.
But under the Clean Power Plan, each State's electricity plan
would have to meet EPA's criteria for reducing carbon dioxide
emissions and be approved by EPA.
    Other EPA regulations like the Utility MACT rule have
already contributed to rising electric rates and growing
concerns about reliability. With the economy still far from
fully recovered, the last thing job creators need is another
expensive regulation likely to drive up energy prices. And the
last thing our families and senior citizens need is to see
their electric bills continue to go up.
    Next week I will be introducing greenhouse gas legislation
with my colleagues that will preserve the proper balance of
State and Federal authority, help ensure reliable and
affordable electricity, and protect jobs and our economy.

          OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. THOMAS R. CARPER,
            U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF DELAWARE

    Senator Carper. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Thanks so very
much for holding our hearing today.
    I want to welcome our witnesses. Nice to see you all today.
And thanks for joining us for this important conversation.
    Today's hearing will continue the discussion of the legal
implications of EPA's proposed carbon regulations known as the
Clean Power Plan. I was born, as some of you know, in Beckley,
West Virginia, Raleigh County, West Virginia. One of the 15
founders of West Virginia, Raleigh County, was my great-great-
great-great-great-grandfather, Joseph Carper. And as a native
of a county where coal mining was important, remains important,
and now as a Senator, recovering Governor, representing the
lowest lying State in the Nation, I have a unique perspective
on the balance that we must strike to make environmental
regulation work; not just for my State, not just for your
States, but for all of our States.
    For those of us from States that are already being impacted
by climate change, the EPA's Clean Power Plan to regulate our
Nation's largest source of carbon pollution is not just
important, but it is essential. Many States, such as Maryland,
my home State of Delaware, have already taken action to reduce
lower power plant emissions. However, we need all States to do
their fair share to protect the air that we breathe and stem
the tide of climate change. In order for these standards to be
effective, the EPA must ensure that all 50 States are capable
of complying with these standards.
    Today, the EPA has conducted an unprecedented level of
State and local government outreach, not just to State and
local governments, but to utilities, to businesses, in order to
craft a comprehensive plan that works for each State. Under the
Clean Power Plan, States can create their own plan for meeting
their targets in a number of ways, including by increasing
renewable energy, such as wind and solar, and increasing the
efficiency of their electrical grid.
    Unfortunately, since the day that EPA proposed the Clean
Power Plan, it has been criticized as being outside the
Agency's authority under the Clean Air Act and the U.S.
Constitution. I believe these claims are without basis in fact.
    In 2006, 10 States actually sued EPA to force it to
regulate carbon pollution from power plants. Since then, the
U.S. Supreme Court has ruled, not once, not twice, but three
times in support of EPA's legal authority to control carbon
pollution under existing law.
    In 2007, the Supreme Court confirmed in Massachusetts v.
EPA that, as passed by Congress, the Clean Air Act gave the EPA
the authority to regulate carbon pollution.
    The legal precedent for the Clean Power Plan is, at least
in my mind, clear; and attempts by Congress and other parties
to challenge its legality are essentially an attempt to delay
implementation of the Plan.
    As we have seen in the past, litigation over carbon
pollution regulations has the potential to be stuck in the
courts for several years. The longer we wait to reduce our
carbon output, the more severe and perhaps irreversible the
effects of climate change will become; and, frankly, the more
severe the changes that will have to be adopted to deal with
this coming problem.
    Meanwhile, public health and our economy will continue to
be endangered by more frequent storms, intense droughts, and
sea level rise.
    Personally, I am committed to making sure Congress does all
it can do to support the implementation of the Clean Power
Plan, and I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today
about our progress in doing so.
    Let me just close with one thought. I was born in Beckley,
West Virginia; family still in that area, all over the State,
actually. I remember going as a little boy going to a little
church, Grace Gospel Church just outside of Beckley in a town
called Shady Springs, which you know, Madam Chairman. And at a
very early age I was told the Golden Rule: treat other people
the way we want to be treated. I think the Golden Rule is
probably the most important rule of all, and I think it should
be apply here as well.
    I want to make sure that we treat West Virginia fairly. I
want to make sure that we treat Delaware fairly. I want to make
sure that the States that are seeing sea level rise, which
poses enormous threat to us--the highest point in Delaware is a
bridge; it is not a mountain. It is not a mountain, it is a
bridge. We already see the effects of sea level rise in my
State and we are concerned about it, and, frankly, so are a lot
of other States. I want to make sure we are fair to us in the
First State; I want to make sure that we are fair to the folks
in the Mountain State.
    With that in mind, let's have a good hearing. Thank you.
    Senator Capito. Thank you.
    I would like to tell the audience and the witnesses that we
are scheduled to have a vote somewhere between 10:15 and 10:30,
so my plan would be to try to get through opening statements
and then adjourn quickly and let us go vote, make that one vote
and come back to the question portion. I reserve the right to
change my mind. I might say we will just rotate inside and out.
That might be a better way to do it. But at that point I just
wanted to put you on alert.
    At this time, I would like to recognize the chairman of the
full committee, Mr. Inhofe, from Oklahoma, for purposes of
making some comments.

          OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES M. INHOFE,
            U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA

    Senator Inhofe. I thought that was just my wife that made
that statement, about changing her mind.
    [Laughter.]
    Senator Inhofe. I appreciate it very much, Senator Capito.
    We have some people here today from Oklahoma; they came up
here, the Rural Electric Coop. They are concerned. You know, in
Oklahoma we get this question all the time. They say, now wait
a minute. If we are reliant upon fossil fuel for 50 percent of
the power to run this machine called America and they take that
away, how do you run the machine called America? And I said,
come up and find out, because I don't know either.
    Three things real quickly. Cap-and-trade started, this was
way back in 2002, and at that time they first said the world is
coming to an end, all the global warming and all that stuff.
Now, they tried to pass it legislatively from 2002 up until the
current time, and they are unable to do that. So what we are
looking at now is the Federal Government coming in under the
Obama administration, trying to do through regulation what they
couldn't do through legislation.
    Second, when Lisa Jackson was the Administrator of the EPA
under Obama, I asked her the question, in this room, live on
TV, I said, you know, if we were to pass, either through
regulation or through legislation, would this have the effect
of reducing CO2 emissions worldwide? And she said,
no, it wouldn't because this isn't where the problem is. So
even if you are a believer in those things, it wouldn't work.
    The last thing, I am not a lawyer, but I was on several
radio shows this morning with Scott Pruitt, our attorney
general, and I learned a lot, Scott, from you. But when the
President's own law professor, Laurence Tribe, recently
testified before the House, he said that the EPA was attempting
an unconstitutional trifecta, usurping the prerogatives of the
States, Congress, and the Federal Courts all at once. This was
Barack Obama's Harvard Law professor.
    With that, I look forward to the opening statements.
    [The prepared statement of Senator Inhofe follows:]

                  Statement of Hon. James M. Inhofe,
                U.S. Senator from the State of Oklahoma

    We are here today to talk with legal experts and Attorneys
General about the Environmental Protection Agency's proposed
CO2 regulations for existing power plants. This
proposal is another attempt by the Obama administration to
circumvent the role of Congress and achieve through regulatory
fiat what the President could not achieve through legislation.
    Congress has already been very clear in its opposition to a
federally mandated emission reductions scheme when cap-and-
trade legislation failed under a Democrat controlled Senate,
yet the President is choosing to ignore the will of Congress
and the American people by mandating this country's energy
system be restructured in an unprecedented, likely illegal and
economically damaging way.
    It's not just Republicans that disagree with the legal
premise of the Clean Power Plan. The President's own
constitutional law professor, Lawrence Tribe, recently
testified before the House Energy and Commerce Committee
hearing that his EPA was attempting an ``unconstitutional
trifecta usurping the prerogatives of the States, Congress and
the Federal Courts--all at once.''
    It is very telling when even legal and environmental
experts that agree with the Administration's overall objective,
do not agree with the means by which they are attempting to
achieve that objective.
    The EPA, an agency of unelected bureaucrats, expects the
States to cede authority over its intrastate energy systems, so
that the EPA can then tell its citizens what type and how much
energy they can use. This is counter to the purpose of the
Clean Air Act and undermines the longstanding principle of
cooperative federalism where the Federal Government is meant to
work in partnership with the States to achieve environmental
objectives.
    This proposal is legally unsound, and comes with a $479
billion compliance cost, will result in double digit
electricity price increases in 43 States and has negligible
environmental benefits--environmental benefits the EPA did not
even bother to measure and will be rendered pointless by 1
month of carbon emissions in China.
    This is why 32 States oppose this rule and 12 have sued the
EPA over this proposal. I am thankful that two of the States
leading the charge against this rule--West Virginia and
Oklahoma--are here to testify.
    This is an unprecedented regulatory action where the agency
is attempting to rewrite the law in a manner that Congress
explicitly prohibited. Congress writes the laws and the
agencies interpret them--even under President Obama.
    I will not stand by and let the EPA force States to spend
their resources in a manner that will harm local economies and
force their citizens to pay for the President's misguided
legacy. Especially when it is not a matter of if the Clean
Power Plan will be ruled illegal, but when.
    I thank all the witnesses for being here and I look forward
to their testimony.

    Senator Capito. Thank you.
    I would like to recognize, we will go, from my view, left
to right. Our first witness is Hon. Patrick Morrisey, who is
the Attorney General of the State of West Virginia. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF HON. PATRICK MORRISEY, ATTORNEY GENERAL, STATE OF
                         WEST VIRGINIA

    Mr. Morrisey. Well, thank you very much, Chairman Capito,
Ranking Member Carper, and all of the distinguished members of
this subcommittee. I very much appreciate the opportunity to be
here today to testify against the President's so-called Clean
Power Plan.
    I do want to say at the outset I feel good about this
hearing because West Virginia seems to have some support, both
from the Chair and the ranking member side. So, Senator Carper,
you are always welcome to come back to the great State of your
birth. Thank you.
    Now, I am here today to talk about the legal problems in
the Obama administration's so-called Clean Power Plan, commonly
known as the 111(d) Rule. This Rule seeks to require States to
reduce emissions from existing coal-fired power plants by, on
average, a staggering 30 percent over a 15-year period.
    Now, make no mistake about it, finalizing this proposal
would have a devastating impact on my State, other coal-
producing States, and citizens from across the Country who feel
the negative impact of high electricity prices, lost jobs, and
a potential lack of reliability in the power grid.
    Now, West Virginia is one of the poorest States in the
Country, and yet we are the second largest producer of coal. It
is a very important resource for us. This proposal would result
in even greater economic dislocation in Appalachia at a time
when we can least afford it.
    Now, it is my duty as the chief legal officer of the State
of West Virginia to fight against this unlawful power grab,
which is hurting our citizens. West Virginia has already led a
bipartisan coalition of 15 States before the U.S. Court of
Appeals in D.C., and if this Administration elects to finalize
this rule, West Virginia will challenge it in court, and we
expect that the coalition of 15 States that we are currently
working with will grow.
    Today I would like to talk about just a few of the legal
defects of this proposal.
    Now, as you all know, the EPA bases its claim for legal
authority to adopt this Rule entirely on Section 11(d) of the
Clean Air Act. However, a nearby provision, Section 112 of the
Clean Air Act, EPA prohibits the Agency from invoking Section
111(d) for any pollutant ``emitted from a source category which
is regulated under Section 112.'' We think that language is
very clear.
    And as EPA has repeatedly explained time after time, this
text literally means that if EPA has already regulated a source
category under Section 112, EPA may not then come in and
require States to regulate any pollutants emitted from the same
source category under 111(d).
    Now, this is where the EPA runs into some trouble because,
as we know, in 2012 they already finalized a major rule
affecting coal-fired power plants under Section 112.
    Now, the EPA's legal argument for avoiding this Section 112
exclusion is not credible and defies all traditional rules of
administrative law and statutory construction. Let me explain.
    When Congress enacted the present version of the Section
112 exclusion in 1990, they actually made a mistake. It
accidentally included two provisions in the statute at large,
two amendments to the same exact text. One was a substantive
amendment that replaced a cross-reference and exchanged the
exclusion to its present form. The second was a conforming
amendment, a technical amendment, if you will, that was made
107 pages later.
    But once you actually applied the substantive amendment to
the text, it made the conforming change wholly unnecessary, and
that is why the technical error was never included in the U.S.
Code.
    Now, what happened there is actually consistent with the
way Congress has always operated. To the extent that there are
clerical errors in a text, when Congress goes back through the
revisers to decide what goes in the Code, they analyze that and
they apply traditional rules of statutory construction. And, in
fact, we have never seen a situation before where a Federal
agency has literally tried to push such sweeping proposal on
the basis of a typo. It is unprecedented.
    But perhaps the most radical feature of Section 111(d) Rule
is its sheer breadth. Rather than follow the traditional
pathway of opposing an emission rule on a particular source
category to make that source category more environmentally
friendly, the Section 111(d) Rule requires States to replace
coal-fired energy with other sources of energy, and even reduce
consumer demand for energy. That means that the Section 111(d)
Rule seeks not only to regulate power plant emissions, it is a
mandate for States to fundamentally reorder their electricity
sectors and pick winners and losers between those sectors. This
Rule would regulate from power to plug.
    Now, as Allison Wood, a well-respected attorney, recently
indicated before the House Energy and Commerce Committee, the
EPA's claim here is analogous to the Agency asserting that its
authority to regulate automobile emissions provides it with the
power to order citizens to take a bus to work or buy electric
cars on the theory that the measures would reduce car
emissions.
    Section 111(d) simply does not grant the EPA such broad
sweeping power.
    Thank you very much.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Morrisey follows:]

       [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


      Response to a Question for the Record--Hon. Patrick Morrisey

    Senator Whitehouse:

    Question. Please describe any communications you have had
with any element of the fossil fuel industry regarding the
substance of your testimony before the EPW Committee for this
hearing.

    Response. I worked exclusively with my staff in preparing
my testimony to the Committee, drawing upon my Office's
extensive familiarity with the so-called Clean Power Plan.
Although we did not discuss the remarks with any outside group,
we have worked on these issues with a broad, bipartisan
coalition of stakeholders, including labor unions, coal
operators, businesses, and consumer groups. Notably,
stakeholders across the political spectrum in West Virginia--
from coal miners to energy companies to elected officials from
both parties--are united in opposition to EPA's illegal Plan,
which will have devastating impacts upon our State. Opposing
this illegal Plan remains one of the top priorities for my
Office, and that will continue to be the case.

    Senator Capito. Thank you.
    Now, I have just been informed that the vote has been
called, so hold on here, let me see what we prefer to do.
    [Pause.]
    Senator Capito. OK, we are going to go vote, so we will
stand and recess and return. We should be here shortly. Thank
you for your patience.
    [Recess.]
    Senator Capito. That was pretty quick, I think, and we will
resume the hearing.
    I would like to welcome Hon. Scott Pruitt, who is the
Attorney General from the State of Oklahoma. Welcome.

  STATEMENT OF HON. SCOTT PRUITT, ATTORNEY GENERAL, STATE OF
                            OKLAHOMA

    Mr. Pruitt. Good morning, Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member
Carper, Chairman Inhofe, and members of the subcommittee. It is
a joy to be with you this morning. It is good to be with my
dear colleague and friend from West Virginia. I appreciate the
invitation to discuss the legal ramifications of the EPA's
proposed Clean Power Plan.
    This is an issue of major importance to States across the
Country like Oklahoma.
    Quite simply, Madam Chairwoman, the EPA does not possess
the authority under the Clean Air Act to do what it is seeking
to accomplish in the so-called Clean Power Plan.
    The EPA, under this Administration, treats States like a
vessel of Federal will. The EPA believes States exist to
implement the policies the Administration sees fit, regardless
of whether laws like the Clean Air Act permit such action.
    In their wisdom, Congress gave States a primary role in
emissions regulation, noting in the statement of policy of the
Clean Air Act that ``air pollution control at its source is the
primary responsibility of States and local governments.''
    That statement respects the constitutional limits on
Federal regulation of air quality and the reality that States
are best suited to develop and implement such policies.
    States are able to engage in a cost-benefit analysis to
strike the necessary balance between protecting and preserving
the environment, while still creating a regulatory framework
that does not stifle job growth and economic activity. The
States are partners with the Federal Government, as the
chairwoman noted in her comments, with the Federal Government
regulating such matters.
    Therefore, the Clean Air Act hinges on cooperative
federalism by giving States the primary responsibility and role
for regulation while providing a Federal backstop if the States
should fail to act.
    When the EPA respects the role of the States, the
cooperative relationship works well. When the EPA exceeds the
constraints placed upon the Agency by Congress, the
relationship is thrown out of balance and the rule of law and
State sovereignty is affected adversely.
    The Clean Power Plan proposal throws the cooperative
relationship between the States and the Federal Government off
balance.
    The EPA claims the proposal gives States flexibility to
develop their own plans to meet the national goals of reducing
carbon dioxide emissions. In reality, the Clean Power Plan is
nothing more than an attempt by the EPA to expand Federal
agency power at the expense of States energy power generation.
    The Plan requires each State to submit a plan to cut carbon
dioxide emissions by a nationwide average, the attorney general
indicated earlier, by 30 percent by the year 2030.
    In Oklahoma, 40.5 percent of our energy production comes
from coal-fired generation and 38 percent comes from natural
gas. Oklahoma, notably, ranks fourth in the Country in
generating electricity through wind.
    This begs the question: How does the EPA expect States like
Oklahoma, and the top four in the Country in generating
electricity through renewables, to meet the goals of the Clean
Power Plan? There are only so many ways Oklahoma can achieve a
30 percent reduction demanded by the EPA. The Plan, therefore,
must be viewed as an attempt by the EPA to force States into
shuttering coal generation and eventually other sources of
fossil fuel generated electricity.
    Additionally, the proposed Rule, through its building block
four, would require States to use demand-side energy efficiency
measures that would reduce the amount of generation required.
However, States are limited to emission standards that actually
can be achieved by existing industrial sources through source-
level, inside-the-fence measures.
    The proposal's attempt to force States to regulate energy
consumption and generation throughout their jurisdictions, in
the guise of reducing emissions from fossil fuel-fired plants,
violates Section 111(d)'s plain text requirement that the
performance standards established for existing sources by the
States must be limited to measures that apply at existing power
plants themselves, inside the fence.
    EPA's approach converts the obscure, little-used Section
111(d) into a general enabling act, giving EPA power over the
entire grid from generation to light switch. By going beyond
source-level, inside-the-fence-line measures, EPA's proposal
would expand 111(d), and specifically the underlying statutory
term ``best system of emission reduction'' into a whole new
regime of regulation, one that regulates not only pollutant
emission by sources, but the State's entire resource and energy
grid.
    To meet the objectives of the EPA's proposed rule, States
would be forced to rework their energy generation market. To
account for the loss of coal-fired generation, States will be
forced into changing their energy mix in favor of renewables.
States will be also forced to alter existing regulatory
framework which would threaten energy affordability and
reliability for consumers, industry, and energy producers.
    Finally, there is a substantial concern that the EPA,
before the Clean Power Plan is even finalized, will issue a
uniform Federal implementation plan that will be forced upon
those States that don't acquiesce to the unlawful Clean Power
Plan.
    Such a move by the EPA would be the proverbial gun to the
head of the States, demanding the States to act as the EPA sees
fit or face punitive financial situations for their States.
    Madam Chairwoman, I can say with great confidence that if
the EPA does in fact move forward with the uniform FIP, the EPA
will be challenged in court by Oklahoma and other like-minded
States.
    I am not one who believes the EPA has no role. The Agency
has played a very important role historically in addressing
water and air quality issues that traverse State lines.
However, with this rule, the Agency is now being used to pick
winners and losers in the energy market by elevating renewable
power at the expense of fossil fuel generation.
    No State should comply with the Clean Power Plan if it
means surrendering decisionmaking authority to the EPA, a power
that has not been granted to it by this Congress. States should
be left to make decisions on the fuel diversity that best meets
their generation needs.
    States like Oklahoma care about these issues because we
breathe the air, drink the water, and want to preserve the land
for future generations, and we have developed a robust
regulatory regime that has successfully struck a balance
between maintaining and preserving air and water quality, while
still considering the economic impact of such regulations.
    Madam Chairwoman, States like Oklahoma are simply opposed
to the Clean Power Plan because it is outside the authority
granted to the EPA by the law. We only ask that the State
authority under the Clean Air Act be respected and preserved,
and the decisions on power generation and how to achieve
emissions reductions be made at the local level rather than at
the Federal level.
    I again appreciate the opportunity to speak with you today
and discuss these important matters. Thank you.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Pruitt follows:]

       [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


      Response to a Question for the Record--Hon. E. Scott Pruitt

    Senator Whitehouse:

    Question. Please describe any communications you have had
with any element of the fossil fuel industry regarding the
substance of your testimony before the EPW Committee for this
hearing.

    Response. My office did not have any contact with any
outside groups regarding the substance of my testimony to this
Committee and its honorable members.

    Senator Capito. Thank you.
    Our next witness is Mr. Roger Martella. He is a Partner at
Sidley Austin and he was formally the General Counsel at the
USEPA. Welcome.

 STATEMENT OF ROGER MARTELLA, JR., PARTNER, SIDLEY AUSTIN, LLP

    Mr. Martella. Thank you, Madam Chair, Ranking Member
Carper, Chairman Inhofe. Thank you for the opportunity to
appear before this committee once again. It is a great honor.
    EPA has yet to finalize the Existing Source Performance
Standard, but that hasn't stopped the lawyers from submitting
thousands of pages of legal arguments to the Agency, both in
passionate support of the rulemaking and in vehement opposition
of it. I have added to that mix a little bit today with some
written testimony that I shared with you, but what I thought I
would do is digest those scores of arguments into what I think
are going to be the two overarching issues that the court is
going to consider when it ultimately reviews the final rule.
    The first is picking up on a point from Senator Carper in
his introduction, that if we look at how the courts have
responded to climate change issues since 2007, since
Massachusetts v. EPA, we have had a lot of direction in the
last few years from the Supreme Court, the D.C. Circuit, the
Ninth Circuit; and what the courts have told us is that they
take climate change extremely seriously. Regardless of what I
might think about it, what anyone here might think about it,
the courts have expressed that they view climate change as a
paramount policy concern and they have been highly deferential
not only to EPA, but to the States, when they have engaged in
creative mechanisms to use old and outdated tools to address
the modern challenge of climate change. So I agree with that
proposition. The courts have been recognizing that and they
won't look at this in a political vacuum or a policy vacuum;
the courts will consider that when they review the rule and the
goal of what the EPA is trying to do here.
    Now, having said that, the other countervailing
consideration from the other side will be the unprecedented
nature of what EPA is trying to do with its existing authority
under the Clean Air Act, and what I am talking about
specifically, of the many legal issues, the one that I think is
going to get the most attention from the court is something you
have probably heard about several times by now, EPA's approach
to regulate sources beyond the fence line of those sources, and
it basically works like this: if my pen here is my coal-fired
power plant, for the 45 years in the history of the Clean Air
Act, the EPA has always set a standard for this coal-fired
power plant based on the technology that could be achieved at
this source, on what this coal-fired power plant could do.
    But now EPA is saying in order to address climate change,
that is going to limit us. We can only get so many emissions
from the coal-fired power plant, so we have to look beyond the
fence line; we have to look at natural gas facilities, we have
to look at renewable energy, nuclear energy, the energy
efficiency of buildings like this. And that will enable us, for
the first time, to achieve greater reductions in greenhouse
gases than what we can get from this coal-fired power plant.
    Now, back to my first point. The court may think that is a
noble goal, but at the same time it is going to be thinking
also about the legal precedent of this beyond-the-fence-line
approach for the first time in 45 years of the Clean Air Act;
and it has really three precedential ramifications. The first
is the practical ramification. As the two generals have spoken
today, is the enormous expansion of authority to make EPA not
only a regulator of the environment, but really the most
significant regulator of energy at the national level. In order
to get those greenhouse reductions, it has to include in its
regulatory authority nuclear facilities, renewable energy
facilities, energy efficiency in countless buildings. So it is
expanding its authority to the entire energy market in a way
that really Congress should be speaking to and Congress should
be authorizing, as opposed to looking at inherent authority.
    The second ramification is a legal one, and the courts are
going to be concerned about the legal precedent here, that this
is a departure from the Clean Air Act's historic approach
focusing on sources, on the case law that has been consistent
in EPA's past application. Never before in 45 years has EPA
gone beyond a source and gone beyond the fence line. In the
case law and the couple times it has tried to do so has shut
that down.
    And then the third concern for the courts is going to be
the precedential nature of this on other sectors. If EPA is
affirmed with this approach, this beyond-the-fence-line
approach here, as it starts to regulate greenhouse gases from
other sectors down the road, there is really going to be almost
no limit to how it can look beyond an individual source to
bring in other sources and, by the way, also hold other sources
that are not currently subject to Clean Air Act regulation,
like a nuclear facility, like this building and energy
efficiency, bring them into EPA's regulatory regime.
    While I have said the Supreme Court has endorsed EPA's
climate change rules, there is an asterisk there. Less than a
year ago, the Supreme Court did say, in partially affirming
EPA, but partially reversing EPA, that EPA cannot look to the
Clean Air Act to engage in sector-wide economic regulation; and
that came out just 4 days after this Rule that the Supreme
Court said we will not allow EPA to use the Clean Air Act to
regulate lots of small sources and engage in sector-wide
regulation of the economy. It is unfathomable how the justices
that were concerned in that instance with EPA regulation
wouldn't be concerned with this regulation.
    The last thing I just wanted to mention briefly is the harm
that we are going to see in the interim, during judicial
review. It takes about 4 years for courts to review cases like
this if it goes to the Supreme Court, and, again, the generals
have spoken to some of the harms going to the State. I do want
to point out, any single rule, everybody is always going to
allege harm. But this is fundamentally distinctive because of
the ways I think Attorney General Pruitt and Morrisey have
talked about, the ways States have to fundamentally restructure
and reorganize their entire system of regulating energy,
creating energy infrastructure, and also developing laws,
enacting laws that promote renewable portfolio standards,
energy efficiency programs, and so on. So this is fundamentally
distinct in terms of the harm that is going to be realized in
the short-term from other environmental rulemakings.
    Thank you again for this opportunity.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Martella follows:]

       [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


    Senator Capito. Thank you very much.
    Our next witness is Ms. Kelly Speakes-Backman. She is a
member of the Maryland Public Service Commission and she is
also the Co-Chair of the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative.
Welcome.

  STATEMENT OF KELLY SPEAKES-BACKMAN, MARYLAND PUBLIC SERVICE
         COMMISSIONER, CHAIR, BOARD OF DIRECTORS, RGGI

    Ms. Speakes-Backman. Thank you. Good morning. Thank you for
inviting me to speak today. It is truly an honor.
    Since the issuance of the Clean Power Plan, proponents and
opponents alike have been engaged in many discussions about
what the next steps are. Reiterating a sentiment expressed by
one of my dear fellow panelists, one of the most significant
questions for States right now is how do I comply.
    I respectfully submit to you, from the perspective of a
State that already has boots on the ground on this issue, not
only can States comply with the Clean Power Plan, but we can do
so in a way that generates economic benefits and supports grid
reliability.
    Furthermore, I ask in return can we, as States, afford not
to comply with the Plan?
    Rather than looking at this in the contexts of a Federal
implementation plan and what that would mean look like, I
encourage the legal experts and legislators to view this
situation from a State regulator's perspective.
    As noted in the recently released Quadrennial Energy
Review, severe weather is the leading cause of power
disruptions, costing the U.S. economy from $18 billion to $33
billion a year. And as a rate utility regulator, I have the
statutory obligation to ensure reliable and affordable
electricity. In a restructured market I need more tools at my
disposal than what is available to me from within the fence
line of a power plant in order to meet those requirements.
    Modernizing the electricity grid is critical and it
requires multi-state collaboration to implement cost-effective
infrastructure improvements. The proposed Plan is an impetus
for us States to access our grid and to face the reality of an
already shifting fuel mix. Adding carbon pollution reductions
is a metric for States to consider.
    The RGGI States have continued for 7 years now, and coming
up on 28 auctions, to successfully implement the Nation's first
fully operational carbon market. The RGGI program, initiated by
a bipartisan group of Governors and developed collaboratively
by economic and environmental regulatory bodies, caps emissions
by first determining a regional budget of carbon dioxide
allowances and then distributing a majority of those allowances
through the regional auctions at market prices, and finally
capturing that value for reinvestment into strategic energy
programs.
    Although we have collaborated for the better part of a
decade, the region remains surprisingly diverse. We comprise
three different separate electricity regions, different
political and economic landscapes, and dissimilar generation
profiles. Maryland, for example, is 44 percent coal.
    It is a little bit surprising for those who look into the
RGGI region and think of us all as northeastern States. But we
have learned to balance that and we have learned to diversify
our fuel mix. We have gone, from 2005 to 2013, from 56 to 44
percent coal, demonstrating that it is actually possible for a
State with a significant coal generation profile to reduce our
carbon dioxide emissions. The carbon intensity of the whole
RGGI region's power sector has decreased at twice the rate of
the rest of the Country.
    So you will find more statistics in my written testimony
that attest to the economic and environmental benefits for our
region and for my State. The benefits informed our perspective
of the RGGI States as we voiced support for the framework of
the Clean Power Plan and recommended revisions to ensure that
early action is recognized and that State targets are
verifiable, transparent, equitable, and enforceable.
    Regional mass-based programs like RGGI are advantageous in
part because they closely align with the nature of the grid
already and they allow for transparent and verifiable tracking
and compliance systems. Recent analysis even from our own
regional transmission organization, PJM, calculated higher
compliance costs for States that go it alone, underscoring the
cost-effectiveness of regional plans. States that work together
can implement a regional emission budget across a larger
geographic boundary and they can find the least cost solutions
across a larger selection of options.
    To add some perspective on the timing, just a really quick
one on that. The power sector has already responded effectively
in the RGGI region to environmental regulations in less time
than the EPA provides the rest of the Country as part of the
Clean Power Plan. In fact, measures supported by RGGI
investments have advanced reliability goals in the region in
just 7 years. In contrast, States have 15 years to meet the
final compliance goals. We have reduced our carbon dioxide
emissions from power plants by 40 percent, while our region's
economy grew by 8 percent over that same timeframe.
    Finally, we have accumulated some pretty good lessons as a
participant in RGGI that we hope will be instructive to other
States. No. 1, we formed intra- and interagency relationships
through cooperative effort, which allows us to do a lot more
for a lot less. The regional mechanism has stimulated quite
some good stakeholder engagements as many of the compliance
entities span multiple jurisdictions and appreciate the
regional consistency. The third is that consistency doesn't
mean that we have to have identical programs. Each State has
its own programs based on its own policy and needs.
    And, last, I think the most important lesson is that
participation in a mass-based regional compliance effort will
likely provide our States the most flexibility moving forward.
Using this mass-based construct, the cap is the only
enforceable mechanism, and that cap is enforced by our
individual State regulators. So States retain jurisdiction over
their individual energy efficiency and renewable energy
programs; they are not subject to the Federal implementation.
And we can continue to offer these initiatives to mitigate the
cost of compliance for ratepayers.
    So thank you. We look forward to working with you and
answering questions.
    [The prepared statement of Ms. Speakes-Backman follows:]

    [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


    Senator Capito. Thank you.
    And our final witness is Ms. Lisa Heinzerling, who is a
Professor at Georgetown University. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF LISA HEINZERLING, PROFESSOR, GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY

    Ms. Heinzerling. Thank you and thank you for inviting me to
appear before you today to discuss the legal implications of
EPA's carbon dioxide rule.
    Many dramatic legal arguments have been raised against
EPA's proposal. Opponents of EPA's proposal have claimed that
the proposal is unconstitutional under any one of a number of
novel theories. They have also argued that the whole proposal,
or significant aspects of it, are unlawful under the Clean Air
Act. We have heard several such arguments already this morning.
    In my view, the constitutional and statutory arguments that
have been raised against EPA's proposed rule collapse upon
close inspection.
    For example, constitutional principles of federalism are
not violated by EPA's proposal. Under EPA's proposal, States
have a choice. They may devise their own plans to meet the
State-specific targets EPA will set or they may let EPA devise
a plan for them. This is the very same choice States have had
for 45 years under the Air Quality Standards Program of the
Clean Air Act. It is not an unconstitutional choice.
    Nor does EPA's proposal violate the doctrine forbidding
delegations of legislative authority to the Executive. EPA is
interpreting statutory provisions of less than ideal clarity,
using its best judgment to offer an interpretation that gives
some force to the provisions enacted by Congress. The opponents
of EPA's rule argue that if EPA interprets the statute the
right way, the way they favor, it raises no non-delegation
issue. But, they say, if EPA interprets the statute the wrong
way, the way they don't like, this violates the non-delegation
doctrine.
    In 2001, in a case called Whitman v. American Trucking
Association, Justice Scalia, writing for a unanimous Supreme
Court, rejected this exact theory, the theory that an agency
can cure or create a non-delegation problem by adopting a
particular interpretation of a statute.
    If the Clean Air Act presents EPA with an unconstitutional
choice between apparently conflicting provisions, which it does
not, the remedy would be to strike those provisions down, not
to require the adoption of the interpretation that opponents of
this rule prefer.
    EPA's proposal also does not violate the Clean Air Act.
Much has been made of the two different 1990 amendments to
Section 111(d), both passed by Congress and both signed into
law by President George H.W. Bush. EPA has long offered an
interpretation of Section 111(d) that aims to take something
from each of these amendments.
    Under EPA's construction of the amendments, EPA may not,
under Section 111, regulate the same hazardous air pollutants
from the same sources under both that section, Section 111, and
Section 112. This interpretation makes perfect sense and
respects the larger structure of the Clean Air Act, which
pervasively leaves room for regulation in the event new threats
from air pollution come to the fore.
    EPA's proposed consideration of a wide range of emissions
reduction measures and setting State targets, including
renewable portfolio standards and demand-side energy
efficiency, is also consistent with the broad authority given
to it by Section 111(d). In contrast to what we have heard this
morning already, this kind of approach is not unprecedented.
EPA has long, for conventional air pollutants, allowed
compliance via renewable energy standards and energy efficiency
programs.
    And here it is worth thinking about what the claim is. The
claim is that, in essence, there is too much flexibility
afforded by the Plan. It is worth noting here the Office of
Management and Budget of the White House, in 2003, noted that
the Clean Air Act had the largest quantified health benefits of
any Federal regulatory program. The latest EPA study of costs
and benefits of the Clean Air Act found in a central estimate
that the Clean Air produces $30 worth of benefits for every
dollar-worth of costs. The ratio is 30 to 1 under a central
estimate. Under a high estimate of benefits, it is 90 to 1.
    This doesn't happen by accident. This kind of program, this
kind of statutory implementation happens as a result of firm,
but sensible interpretation of broad statutory provisions. It
is mystifying to me that opponents of the Clean Power Plan are
criticizing EPA for exhibiting the same good sense and
flexibility that has served the Clean Air Act and this Country
so well for 45 years.
    [The prepared statement of Ms. Heinzerling follows:]

     [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]



    Senator Capito. Thank you.
    Appreciate everybody's testimony, and I will begin with
questions.
    Attorney General Morrisey, let me ask you a question. We
obviously have a difference of opinion here. The Supreme Court
recently said that it is skeptical ``when an agency claims to
discover in a long extant statute an unheralded power to
regulate a significant portion of the American economy.''
    I guess my question is how long has 111(d) existed and has
it ever been used outside the fence line to overhaul an entire
sector?
    Mr. Morrisey. Ms. Chairman, this actually is literally an
unprecedented effort on the part of the EPA to regulate, and we
have looked very closely and we have never seen a proposal
quite like this both in terms of its scope and its willingness
to regulate outside the fence, but also the legal theory that
is being advanced here by the Administration. If you go back to
1970 and then you go up all the way to modern day, to today,
you are looking at nothing that has ever occurred quite like
this. Now, there have been some select efforts to rely on
111(d) in very limited circumstances, but nothing ever
approaching this magnitude.
    And the other critical point is that from 1990 no Federal
agency, no one has ever questioned that if you were to regulate
under 112, that the literal text would ultimately preclude the
State-by-State emission targets that are being set under
111(d). So we think that this is really an unprecedented
approach.
    And we would also add that what the Administration is
trying to do here is rely on a typo, a conforming error, if you
will, in order to breathe life into one of the most sweeping
regulations in our Country's history. If you look to advance
something that has this great an impact on the American
economy, at a minimum, there should be clear authority and not
a reliance on this typo.
    Senator Capito. Mr. Martella, you mentioned in your
statement, I believe, that EPA had never gone that far in terms
of this fence line issue. Could you respond to that question as
well?
    Mr. Martella. Thank you, Madam Chair. That is correct.
There have been a number of occasions where EPA, in the past,
has looked at something called a bubble concept, and that
sounds like exactly what it is, that you can sometimes bring in
the notion that something is more than just a stack, and you
bring in other sources of that bubble. There are two cases that
address that, and both rejected the bubble concept, and those
weren't even in the Section 111(d) context. So the little bit
we have seen of this in the courts has been negative and
pessimistic on that.
    In terms of your question on Section 111(d), EPA has
engaged in five Section 111(d) rulemakings since 1990. In each
single case it has always stayed strictly within the fence
line, the analogous fence line, it has never gone outside of
it. So there is a lack of precedent from the Agency and a
consistent source of case law that would suggest that
everything has to be within the fence, and, frankly, that is
the clear reading of the statute as well.
    Senator Capito. Thank you.
    Attorney General Pruitt, the proposed rule is clearly on
shaky grounds, and I believe Mr. Martella said 4 years before
we would actually maybe get a firm legal interpretation of it
being finalized. So what happens if States start implementing
the final rule, only to have the courts strike the rule down?
What do they do? Are people going to start signing contracts
and breaking ground? What kind of scenario does that present in
your mind?
    Mr. Pruitt. Madam Chairwoman, I think it is a great
question, because what has not been discussed this morning is
the short time line that the EPA is likely going to propose
when they finalize the rule next month. It is our understanding
that it is going to be a 1-year compliance period for States to
submit a State implementation plan, and by any estimation that
is a very ambitious time line. As such, I think what is
happening across the Country is respective Departments of
Environmental Quality at the State level feel as though they
are being pressured, intimidated to comply with a rule that
perhaps is not consistent with the statutory construction,
which is the purpose of our discussion here today. I am very
concerned about the time line.
    And I would add, to Roger's comment earlier, you know, we
have to keep in mind, in fact, one of my fellow panelists is a
public utility corporation; she regulates this at the State
level. The regulation of energy generation is a police power of
the States that has historically been recognized as such
through court cases, and for there to be any intervention into
that police power, there is a rule of statutory construction
that Congress speak explicitly, clearly, unambiguously to the
authority of the Agency to invade that police power that has
been recognized under the law. And I think by virtue of the
discussion here today even among the panelists there is
disagreement about whether this statute clearly provides that
type of authority.
    Senator Capito. Another quick question. And I think your
Governor has said that she will not be doing a State
implementation plan, is that correct?
    Mr. Pruitt. There was an executive order recently issued by
the Governor indicating that the DEQ is not empowered to submit
an invalid plan to the EPA.
    Senator Capito. And I believe in West Virginia, Mr.
Attorney General, that the State legislature weighed in on
this. Could you talk about that just for a minute?
    Mr. Morrisey. Yes. Just recently, a couple months ago, the
State legislature changed the law so that for the State of West
Virginia to submit a State implementation plan the legislation
would have to ratify it. That is different from the previous
law, which would leave all that authority to the Governor.
    Senator Capito. All right. Thank you.
    Senator Carper.
    Senator Carper. Thank you, Madam Chair.
    Senator Inhofe may recall me telling this story before, but
it bears, I think, repeating. Ten or so years ago I was
involved in an effort with Senator George Voinovich and others
to try to find agreement on multi-pollutant legislations
dealing with sulfur dioxide and mercury and CO2, and
as part of that process I remember meeting with a bunch of
utility CEOs from all the Country and we spent about an hour or
so together talking about how we might proceed. And at the end
of the conversation this one old fellow who was with a utility
from someplace down South, I don't remember just where, but he
said to me these words, he said, look, Senator, here is what
you need to do. You need to tell us what the rules are going to
be. You need to give us some flexibility and a reasonable
amount of time and get out of the way. That is what he said.
Tell us what the rules are going to be, give us some
flexibility, a reasonable amount of time, and get out of the
way.
    And I would just say, if I could, for Ms. Heinzerling,
think about that conversation and what that fellow said to me
that day. How does it relate to what we are looking at here
that the EPA is trying to accomplish?
    Ms. Heinzerling. I think it fits it exactly, Senator; that
is, this Plan sets out what States are to do, gives them
targets to meet, gives them the flexibility to choose the way
they want to meet those targets. In this respect, it is strange
and surprising to me that States are already saying that they
would prefer to have the Federal Government set their plans.
But it gives them that kind of flexibility to set their own
plans to meet the targets, and then it gives them the times to
do it. The time lines in this rule are notably long. We are
looking out to 2030 for a final compliance with the structure
of this Plan. So I think your story fits this rule perfectly.
    Senator Carper. Good.
    Ms. Backman, I think you were saying that Maryland has had
a fairly heavy reliance on coal in the generation of
electricity, and I think what you said was that you reduced
over, I don't know, over the last 7 or 8 years, your two
emissions by roughly 40 percent?
    Ms. Speakes-Backman. Yes, sir.
    Senator Carper. And you are part of this regional coalition
with Delaware and a bunch of other States. In my last job that
I had as Governor, I loved the idea of having flexibility. If
the Feds wanted me to do something, I would say give me a menu
of options that I would have. I understand there are, like, at
least four options here that States can use, and this term of
beyond-the-fence-line is an option that is sort of
unprecedented. As I recall working on multi-pollutant
legislation a number of years ago, we were anxious to see what
kind of options that were outside the fence line.
    How could we help it with respect to CO2? How
could we help by going to no-till? How could we help with
respect to encouraging folks to plan switch class and other
crops like that, so the idea of going out of the fence line, it
just seems to me, as my dad would say, that just seems like
common sense.
    Ms. Backman, talk to us about this flexibility, the idea of
actually more flexibility not just by going out of the fence
line, but actually by doing these regional solutions. How is
having a regional solution helped Maryland? And we have
Oklahoma, a producer of wind. God bless you. We are doing that.
But if they were in a regional compact of some kind, could they
actually get some help, as I am sure Maryland and Delaware
have?
    Ms. Speakes-Backman. Absolutely. And thank you for the
question. I will step back just a second and say that EPA has
made unprecedented outreach to the utility regulators of the
Nation through the National Association of Regulatory Utility
Commissioners, and three things that we asked for across the
board and three things we could all agree on, even if the NARU
commissioners don't agree on everything. My good friend,
Chairman McKinney, at the time, these were the things that we
agreed on: that we wanted flexibility, that we wanted
affordability, and that we wanted reliability. And I think the
EPA's Clean Power Plan gives us all of those.
    Now, we have chosen to use all four of these building
blocks in reducing carbon emissions from our RGGI region, but
it is not necessarily necessary to do all four of those
building blocks. And you are not limited to those four building
blocks. The EPA has clearly set out a plan in setting up the
goal, very separately from what the compliance plans will be,
that you may use outside-the-fence-line solutions, and that
includes energy efficiency and demand response that has
actually helped us with reliability. It includes changing fuel
sources from 56 percent coal to a much wider mix of fuel
availability for our generation, which actually helps with
reliability. So we have been able to meet multiple policy goals
for our States that include reliability, affordability, and
reducing carbon by reaching outside the fence.
    Now, that said, we still only regulate State-by-State we
regulate in our RGGI construct at the power plant line. We are
not going in and regulating through RGGI the energy efficiency
programs of each State. Each State regulates their own. I, as a
utility regulator, actually help to make those decisions.
    Senator Carper. Thank you.
    Ms. Speakes-Backman. Thank you.
    Senator Carper. My time has expired.
    Madam Chair, we have a simultaneous meeting going on in
Finance on tax reform. I need to slip over there for a while. I
will be back, though. This is a great hearing. Thank you.
    Senator Capito. Thank you.
    Senator Carper. Thank you all.
    Senator Capito. Senator Inhofe.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Madam Chair.
    I listened to different people here and I get different
ideas, and since I am a rare thing, I am not an attorney--most
of the members of the Senate are--it seems to me that the
practical application of EPA's proposal would require the
States to pass new laws to revise existing regulatory systems,
and I think of this and I think what is wrong with this
picture. Should it be the role of an administrative agency to
be forcing States to take this kind of action?
    And then, second, General Pruitt, is this consistent with
the Clean Air Act, or how does that factor into it?
    Mr. Pruitt. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think, as we
have discussed today, there is a question that keeps coming up
in my mind. If this is such a flexible arrangement that is
offered the States, if this is really within the bounds of
cooperative federalism, why is it that the EPA presently is in
the process of developing a uniform Federal implementation plan
that they are going to put on the shelf to then say to the
States unless you act a particular way, unless you act a
particular way, unless you act consistent with the Rule, this
is what you are going to get.
    That, to me, does not sound like cooperation. That does not
sound like partnership. That sounds like the proverbial gun to
the head of making States act a particular way, and it is
consistent with the comments, Mr. Chairman, that I offered in
my opening statement.
    This EPA looks at State implementation plans and says you
can introduce and adopt a State plan so long as it embodies
Federal will, so long as it embodies that which we want to
happen on a State-by-State basis. And when States disagree,
that is when these Federal implementation plans are forced upon
the States. I don't think there is much discretion to the State
of Oklahoma. As I indicated in my comments, we are already in
the top four States in the Country in generating electricity
through renewables and wind. But yet this EPA is expecting the
State of Oklahoma to reduce their CO2 footprint by
over 30 percent. The question is how, but for shuttering coal
generation in the State of Oklahoma. That is a concern
practically and it is a concern legally.
    Senator Inhofe. Well, looking at it as a non-attorney, you
look at the Tenth Amendment, which refers to reserving power to
the States. Do you think this is consistent with the Tenth
Amendment?
    Mr. Pruitt. Well, I think this case, and I would add this
to the comments earlier from the fellow panelists. I don't
think it is terribly novel for us to have a dispute or a case
about statutory construction. I indicated that it is a
traditional police power to regulate power generation. And for
the Federal Government to intervene or to invade that, the
statute has to be explicit and clear and unambiguous; and I
think by virtue of our discussion today it is demonstrative
that that is not the case.
    So, Senator, I think it is less about the Tenth Amendment,
less about States' rights under the Tenth Amendment, and more
about statutory construction and whether the EPA possesses the
authority that you gave it to regulate in this area.
    Senator Inhofe. Mr. Martella, do you have any comments
about that?
    Mr. Martella. I would agree with that. If I could mention
this theme of flexibility that has come up during our
discussion, I don't think there is anybody who would dispute
flexibility is a good thing. We all want flexibility. But I
think there is a little bit of an apples to oranges situation
going on. I apologize, but I have to go back to my pen.
    So if this is my coal-fired power plant, and if you are
staying inside the fence line, EPA may say for coal-fired power
plant you are currently emitting 2100 tons of CO2
per megawatt hour. We are going to reduce you to 2,000 tons.
That is inside the fence line. What EPA is saying, though, is
we are going to look at nuclear and renewable and energy
efficiency and these other things, and because we are looking
outside the fence line, we are going to bring you down to 1200
pounds of CO2 per megawatt hour, to the point this
coal-fired power plant has to shut down.
    What we are saying or what I am saying is EPA has to set
the standard. Set the standard inside the fence line. If there
is flexibility on how you meet that standard, that is fine, but
you can't look outside the fence in setting the standard. So we
don't dispute, I don't dispute that flexibility is a good
thing, but the distinction is the flexibility doesn't come in
in setting the standard, it comes in on the compliance side.
    Senator Inhofe. OK, that is a good comment.
    General Morrisey, we will probably have another round of
questions and I might get to that building block 3 question
that I want to pose to you, but I know people in West Virginia
and I know what is happening there right now. Even though this
Rule has not gone into effect, what has happened to some of
your coal plants, some of your utilities in your State already
as a result of the threat?
    Mr. Morrisey. Well, Mr. Chairman, it is clear in West
Virginia that the harm is already occurring. In fact, as we
were preparing for the lawsuit that we filed last year against
the EPA, one of the principal arguments that we made is that,
unlike many of the other traditional rules that are subject to
notice and comment, this proposed rule is actually causing real
tangible harm in the States and also it is affecting power
plant operations currently. If you go and look at our
litigation, we have at least eight declarations from very
experienced environmental regulators who talk about the cost of
trying to comply with this rule.
    The other point that I would raise is that the timeframes
associated with this proposal are hyperaggressive. You had a
proposed rule that was issued June 2014, a final rule scheduled
to be issued sometime this summer, and then while the
regulators are suggesting that they may need many years in
order to try to even come up with a plan, they have been given
1 year. That is a very real problem.
    But there are real costs being expended by the States and
also I believe that this Administration is not particularly
interested in whether the rule is finalized so long as the
marketplace actually moves away for them. If coal-fired power
plants have to be retired much quicker than baseline, then they
are going to accomplish their goal even if this regulation
never is upheld in the courts.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, General Morrisey. I do want to
follow up on this. I will wait until the second round.
    Senator Capito. Senator Markey.
    Senator Markey. Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam Chair, I
would ask that two articles by Jody Friedman and Richard
Lazarus be included in the record. They provide a very clear
and thorough explanation of the constitutionality of the EPA's
Clean Power Rule.
    Senator Capito. Without objection.
    Senator Markey. Thank you so much.
    [The referenced documents follow:]

      [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Markey. We are in a big moment. Pope Francis is
about to issue an encyclical on climate change. The College of
Cardinals did a very dangerous thing, they named a Jesuit who
taught chemistry as the Pope. So Pope Francis believes,
actually, that science is the answer to our prayers and we have
to look at the smartest ways that we can deal with this to
reduce the danger that growing greenhouse gases is going to
pose to God's creation, the planet. And I think it is important
for us, then, to find ways to accomplish that goal.
    So back in 1990 we worked on the Clean Air Act. I was on
the committee to draft it and put that law on the books, and I
added, actually, an energy efficiency section to the Clean Air
Act to give more flexibility to the administrator at the EPA,
George Bush's EPA administrator. And there were ways that
utilities could comply with their acid rain requirements by
undertaking activities beyond what was occurring at their power
plants, and I can assure you that my intent and that of my
congressional colleagues was to encourage utilities to look at
the energy system in total to find ways of reducing sulfur
pollution in the air.
    So Ms. Heinzerling, one objection that has been raised
about the Clean Power Plan is that utilities might have to go
beyond the fence of their power plants to achieve their
emission targets. In addition to the acid rain program that I
just mentioned, are there other examples of using energy
efficiency renewables or other beyond-the-fence activities
under the Clean Air Act?
    Ms. Heinzerling. Yes. Very early on, something like 35
years ago, EPA issued a rule that included washing of coal
before it was burned as a compliance mechanism for dealing with
the Clean Air Act. It was something that wasn't within the
source, it wasn't a typical end-of-the-pipe kind of measure. In
regulating interstate pollution or interstate conventional air
pollutant under the Clean Air Act, EPA has for many years
included renewables in energy efficiency as potential
compliance mechanisms.
    If I may just extend this example just a bit further
afield, but I think it illustrates that you are talking about,
if you look at the program under the Clean Air Act, under
Section 202 to regulate mobile sources, you might, if you
looked at that quickly, you might think that is the classic
end-of-the-pipe measure. And yet if you look at EPA's most
recent rules on greenhouse gas emissions for mobile sources,
EPA has, in the terms used today, gone beyond the fence line.
They included flexibilities in their rules that made the rule,
I think, a marvel of modern regulation. They included
consideration of the footprint of the vehicle and the air
conditioning refrigerants used in the vehicle, and flex fuel
vehicles. So if you look not just at the pollution regulation
that we have been talking about, of stationary sources, but
beyond that under the Clean Air Act, it has, I think, become
standard to look for flexibilities.
    Senator Markey. I agree with you, and that was the intent
of the 1990 Act, it was to give more flexibility, it was to use
a different model; and I think that is what this proposed Rule
is going to do as well, it is going to say to each State, move
in a way that accomplishes the goal, but we are going to be
very flexible.
    Let me ask you this question. The constitutionality of
EPA's approach to setting public health standards has been
challenged before. The Supreme Court upheld EPA's approach in a
9-to-nothing opinion in Whitman v. American Trucking in 2001.
In 2011, the Supreme Court ruled that EPA has the authority to
set standards for carbon pollution under Section 111(d) in an
8-to-nothing opinion in American Electric Power v. Connecticut.
And during the oral arguments in that case the counsel argued,
on behalf of AEP, said to the Court we believe that the EPA can
consider, as it is undertaking to do, regulating existing, non-
modified sources under Section 111 of the Clean Air Act.
    Ms. Heinzerling, is there really any constitutional
question about EPA's approach or their legal authority to
regulate carbon pollution under Section 111 of the Clean Air
Act?
    Ms. Heinzerling. No, I don't think so. I think the
constitutional issues have been a distraction. I think they
have been used to make people worry that maybe there is lurking
a real constitutional issue, so we better interpret this
statute narrowly. But the constitutional arguments, I think,
are flimsy. And the statutory authority under the Clean Air
Act, as I have said, I think is clear.
    Senator Markey. Beautiful. Thank you.
    Thank you, Madam Chair.
    Senator Capito. Thank you.
    Senator Barrasso.
    Senator Barrasso. Thank you very much, Madam Chairman.
    Attorney General Pruitt, good to see you again. Oklahoma is
a fossil fuel producing energy State. Attorney General
Morrisey, the State of West Virginia, like the State of
Wyoming, is a coal State. All of our States are particularly
hit by the slew of proposed EPA rules aimed squarely at the
fossil fuel industry and the folks that work in that industry.
    I would like to highlight a letter from the Governor of my
home State of Wyoming, Governor Matt Mead, to EPA Administrator
Gina McCarthy on April 28th of this year, and I ask that the
Governor's letter be entered into the record, Madam Chairman.
    Senator Capito. Without objection.
    Senator Barrasso. Thank you.
    [The referenced document follows:]

     [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


    Senator Barrasso. In this letter, the Governor highlights a
recent study by the Center for Energy Economics and Public
Policy at the University of Wyoming entitled, The Impact of the
Coal Economy on Wyoming. It was published in February of this
year.
    I would ask also that this study be entered into the
record.
    Senator Capito. Without objection.
    Senator Barrasso. Thank you.
    [The referenced document follows:]


      [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]



    Senator Barrasso. The Governor states about the study that
the study determined the single largest threat to Wyoming's
coal industry is EPA's Clean Power Rule. In fact, the study
says that 111(d) climate regulation has the potential to
drastically decrease Wyoming coal production. Production coal
output under the most favorable production circumstances
decreases by 32 percent of the 2012 production by the year
2025.
    The study goes on to say even the best case impact modeling
of the 111(d) scenario suggests a loss of over 7,000 jobs
across the State by 2025 relative to the employment in 2012. It
also says overall proposed carbon regulations result in a
predicted decline in the State's combined coal and natural gas
revenues of between 36 percent and 46 percent by 2030.
    So our State is finding that this Rule will cost thousands
of good paying jobs, will drastically slash State revenue that
pays for college scholarships, schools, medical emergency
services, road safety programs, environmental protection
programs, water quality services, veteran services, other vital
services. Wyoming children, seniors, veterans, fish and
wildlife, they don't deserve, I believe, this dramatic cut in
revenue by the EPA.
    So I find this is recklessly irresponsible, where the costs
are so clear and devastating, and the benefits are theoretical
or unknown. So my question to the two of you is this: Are these
statistics and findings similar to what you are seeing and you
are concerned about in your States? And how will essential
services, State services for children, seniors, as well as the
environment, be impacted both in Oklahoma, as well as in West
Virginia?
    Mr. Morrisey. Sure. So I think you raise a number of very
important issues. We have obviously received a great deal of
feedback from coal operators, from power plants, from coal
miners in the State of West Virginia about the devastating
impact of these rules. But there are a couple other
implications as well.
    For instance, West Virginia, as its tax base, relies very
heavily on coal severance revenues. If you were to look at a
chart and examine some of the revenues that come into each of
the counties from 2011 to now, you will start to see a very
rapid decline. Just recently we have seen news publications
about a number of people that were laid off in the counties
because the coal severance tax revenue had declined.
    The regulations here have far-reaching implications well
beyond coal operators. The fact is for every job that you have
related to coal directly in West Virginia, there are probably
seven jobs that tie in indirectly. It has a fundamental impact
on our economy, and that is just one of the many reasons why
our office has been focused so much on this, because it would
be an absolute travesty to finalize a rule that ultimately has
a real likelihood of being struck down in the courts.
    Senator Barrasso. So the regulations have a direct impact
on the people and the quality of life of the people in your
State.
    Mr. Morrisey. Without a doubt. I mean, as you are looking
at these issues, there are always a wide variety of reasons
that give rise to a particular decision by a power plant
operator or a mine operator to change employment status, but
regulatory burdens is always very high on that list.
    Mr. Pruitt. And, Senator, if I could add to General
Morrisey's comments. Though we do not have a robust coal
economy, we do actually have coal in the State of Oklahoma, we
are vertical in our energy diversity, I think what is lost in
the debate at times is the impact on consumers, those that will
be consuming electricity in the future. In the State of
Oklahoma, between coal and natural gas, 78 percent of our
electricity is generated. As I indicated in my opening comment,
15 percent of our electricity is generated through the wind.
    The choices available to the State of Oklahoma to comply
with this mandate from the EPA of reducing CO2 by
over 30 percent, it puts us in the position of having to make
decisions about the shuttering of coal generation, which, as I
indicated, makes up over 40 percent of our electricity
generation. That is going to increase costs substantially to
consumers; this one rule.
    To give you an example, in the Clean Air Act there is
something called the regional haze statute, as you know,
section of the Clean Air Act. That one rule alone, between PSO,
Public Service Company of Oklahoma, and OG&E in the State of
Oklahoma have seen 15 to 20 percent increases in their
generation of electricity with just one rule. When we combine
all these others, it is going to be, obviously, substantially
more than that in the future for consumers in the State of
Oklahoma.
    Senator Barrasso. So these regulations would directly hurt,
hurt the people of Oklahoma.
    Mr. Morrisey. Some of the folks that can least afford it.
    Senator Barrasso. Thank you.
    Thank you, Madam Chairman.
    Senator Capito. Thank you.
    Senator Whitehouse.
    Senator Whitehouse. Thank you very much, Madam Chairman.
This is an interesting hearing because the questioners on the
Republican side and the attorneys general who are present are
all from States that have the characteristic that Attorney
General Pruitt just described, i.e., they have a robust coal
economy. And clearly we have a practical problem in that the
burning of coal for electric generation creates some very, very
dangerous consequences; but they are not fairly distributed. So
where there is a robust coal economy, this creates one kind of
problem.
    In Rhode Island, where our oceans are up 10 inches against
the shore where our fishermen are seeing fisheries disappear,
where houses that have been there for generations are falling
into the ocean, we have a very different set of problems. And I
think it is important, if we are going to address this, that
we, on the one hand, recognize that there may very well be
economic effects within coal economies from trying to unburden
ourselves of the environmental consequences of coal burning;
and we are, I think, very willing to work with you to mitigate
those consequences.
    But we can't allow those consequences to take us to a point
where we deny that the problem exists. That is just
irresponsible and factually wrong, and ultimately, I think,
potentially really quite disgraceful to the institutions that
we all serve.
    So let me ask you first, Attorney General Pruitt, you said
that one of the problems with the EPA regulation was that this
issue should be left to the local level. Please tell me what
Oklahoma is doing at the local level to address carbon
pollution and climate change.
    Mr. Pruitt. Senator, if I could, in response to your
question, also say that I did not make a reference to the coal
economy in the State of Oklahoma. We do not have a robust coal
economy. In fact, our percentage of generation of electricity
attributable to coal is 40 percent, which is less, I think,
than perhaps Maryland, as it was referenced earlier.
    Senator Whitehouse. Well, I wrote it down as you said it,
and it was robust coal economy. But if that wasn't correct,
then I apologize and I stand corrected. The record will be what
the record is.
    Mr. Pruitt. But I think what Oklahoma has done is engage in
a very much a balancing effort between diverse fuel sources,
from renewables at 15 percent of generated electricity to 40
percent in coal.
    Senator Whitehouse. Why? How does climate change roll into
that calculation?
    Mr. Pruitt. Well, our focus through public utility
corporation decisionmaking, as well as my focus as attorney
general, is not to engage in policy debate about whether
climate action is occurring or not.
    Senator Whitehouse. Why not?
    Mr. Pruitt. It is to look at the statute to determine
whether the EPA is engaging in a process that is consistent
with the authority that you have given the EPA.
    Senator Whitehouse. But why would you be willing to look at
the consequences of the regulation on, for instance, the coal
economy, but not be willing to look at the consequences of this
regulation on environmental protection? Why is that the debate
that you think you need to stay out of when you are willing
actively to get into the debate on the other side? That doesn't
seem balanced.
    Mr. Pruitt. Again, Senator, I think my comments were
referring to the decisionmaking, the discretion that the State
is engaged in as far as balancing generation of electricity
between coal and fossil fuels.
    I would also say to you it is Congress that should be
jealous about protecting its role and what it has told agencies
what they can and cannot do. It is Congress that has set up the
framework that we are talking about this morning between 111
and Section 112.
    Senator Whitehouse. Well, we passed the statute that it is
following, and I am comfortable that they are following it. So
I am not actually jealous at all; I think they are doing
exactly what Congress intended. So I am very comfortable with
that.
    What I am concerned about, we heard from Senator Barrasso
here, from Wyoming, a very important coal State, that the
benefits of this rule are theoretical or unknown. They are not
theoretical or unknown. They are very clear. They are very
specific. And there are people who are very knowledgeable about
it.
    If I could use the remainder of my time to quote one very
well known scientist on this who says, ``We know precisely how
fast CO2 is going up in the atmosphere. We have made
a daily measurement of it since 1957. We have ice core data
before that. We know without any question that it has increased
by almost 40 percent since the industrial revolution, and that
that increase is due to human activity, primarily fossil fuel
burning and, secondarily, bad use in agriculture. There is no
debate about that.''
    He continues, ``There are lots of scientific uncertainties,
but the fact that the planet's warming and the fact that
CO2 is a greenhouse gas, and the fact that is
increasing in the atmosphere and that it increased in the
atmosphere due to humans, about those things there is no
debate.''
    And that is a statement of Dr. Berrien Moore III, who is
the Dean of the University of Oklahoma's College of Atmospheric
and Geographic Sciences. And I think we need to be a little bit
fairer about these hearings if we are going to get to a
suitable result.
    My time has expired and I yield back.
    Senator Capito. Thank you.
    I think I would like to ask another question, make another
statement. I believe the chairman of the full committee and
Senate, certainly, if you are here still, we will go through
another round.
    I would just react a little bit to some of the comments
that were made in terms of the constitutionality and the legal
authority that we are looking at here. I think we all need to
be mindful that this can swing both ways in different
administrations. Just because this time I think the
constitutional overreach is too much and is something that
bears terrific scrutiny, it is not to say that in another 10
years another administration, that Senator Whitehouse would be
thinking the same thing because of the direction it is going.
So I think this is extremely important to look at the legal
implications.
    Also, the comment was made that there was tremendous
outreach to the State regulators, and I would reinforce what I
said in my opening statement, and that I have said before this
committee before and actually testimony was in front of the
committee, that the primary administrator in charge of this at
the EPA wouldn't even come in to the State, our State, to hear
about the seniors whose prices of electricity are going up, the
miners who have lost their jobs, the manufacturers who are
going out of business who are concerned about the price. So I
think maybe there has been outreach, but there hasn't been
enough outreach, in my opinion, to the regular folks that are
really being heavily impacted in those States, where I live.
    I am going to ask really quickly a question to Mr.
Martella. We have heard a lot about whether the--I am getting
back into the legal authority on the four building blocks. What
legal authority, if any, does the EPA have under the Clean Air
Act to impose disposal requirements on natural gas-fired power
plants? Because that is one of their building blocks.
    Mr. Martella. So thank you for asking that question, and
the question about the building blocks two, three, and four,
the dispatching the renewable energy, the energy efficiency.
    Senator Capito. I am going to ask the same question about
all of them, so just wrap it in there.
    Mr. Martella. OK, maybe I can give you the same answer to
all of them. They sync up with your question about
constitutionality, cooperative federalism in this relationship
we are hearing from all the witnesses on the relationship
between the Federal Government and the States. I would like to
answer it in this one way, and it is something that Professor
Heinzerling said in her written testimony. A lot of people make
analogies to the ESPS and the NOx program, which is
something this committee is very familiar with. People say,
well, EPA has always been able to implement the NOx
program; the Supreme Court has endorsed it. Professor
Heinzerling said this is not materially different than that.
    But it is materially different, and I think this is the
answer to your question. In the NOx program,
Congress has specifically authorized EPA to regulate
NOx pollutants, and it has authorized EPA to
delegate that authority to the States. So there are two things
that are different there. At the outset, there is no doubt that
Congress has delegated this authority to EPA, and Congress has
said you can give this authority to the States or you can take
it back.
    The fundamental distinction with the Clean Power Plan, when
we talk about blocks two, three, and four, is EPA saying we now
want States to implement a renewable portfolio standard, or
dispatching system, or an energy efficiency system; and the
distinction here is there is no debate that Congress has never
authorized EPA itself to run a renewable portfolio standard in
West Virginia, or a dispatching system in Oklahoma, or an
energy efficiency program in Rhode Island. So Congress itself
has never given that authority to EPA. EPA cannot, therefore,
delegate that authority further to the States.
    That is just kind of a summary way that I think brings
together these themes of cooperative federalism, constitutional
issues, and the flexibility questions that have come up so far
today.
    Senator Capito. So just so I understand specifically, you
are saying that in the area of NOx, that there is
specific legislative authority for the EPA to go into the
direction that they have gone.
    Mr. Martella. That is correct. That has been well settled;
the Supreme Court has addressed that several times and it is
very clear what Congress set up this cooperative federalism
system there. Again, if a State decides, if my colleague here
from Oklahoma decides not to implement the EPA NOx,
Congress has specifically said, well, EPA has the authority in
the first instance. If Oklahoma decides not to implement a
renewable portfolio standard, Congress has never authorized EPA
to implement that renewable portfolio standard.
    Senator Capito. Thank you.
    Attorney General Morrisey, how many States did you say
joined in the case that you just recently brought?
    Mr. Morrisey. Well, right now we have 15 States, which
includes both attorneys general and Governors; and obviously in
the D.C. Circuit there were three cases that came together and
were consolidated. We led the State effort and then there were
other industry efforts as well.
    Senator Capito. Would you characterize the 18 States as
ones similar to West Virginia, Wyoming, Oklahoma, energy
producing States, or are they just heavily reliant on coal, or
is it all over the board?
    Mr. Morrisey. My sense is that these are strong energy
producing States, but I would note that this is a bipartisan
coalition. The State of Kentucky is also on board with our
lawsuit as well, so we have obviously been reaching out to more
and more States because we believe that even non-coal producing
States or energy producing States should care fundamentally
about whether this 111(d) Rule gets finalized because of some
of the legal implications.
    Senator Capito. Thank you.
    Senator Whitehouse.
    Senator Whitehouse. Thank you very much, Chairman.
    Attorney General Morrisey, is climate change a problem
anywhere in the world?
    Mr. Morrisey. Well, Senator, my role is to serve as the
chief legal officer of the State of West Virginia.
    Senator Whitehouse. That is a pretty simple question.
    Mr. Morrisey. So I am not going to make an argument today
about climate change and whether the temperature is evolving,
because regardless of the policy merits of anyone's proposal,
policies have to be implemented in a lawful manner, and that is
one of my main obligations as the attorney general of the State
of West Virginia.
    Senator Whitehouse. Well, let me just ask Attorney General
Pruitt, is climate change a problem anywhere in the world?
    Mr. Pruitt. Senator, I think that the process matters that
the EPA engages in to address these issues.
    Senator Whitehouse. I get that. But I didn't ask you a
process question; I asked you a question about whether climate
change is a real problem anywhere in the world.
    Mr. Pruitt. I think the question about climate action plan
of the President, climate change, is something that is a policy
consideration of this Congress. If you want EPA to address that
in a direct way, you can amend the Clean Air Act to provide
that authority and the statutory power to do so, so that the
States can know how to conduct themselves in a way that is
consistent with statutory construction.
    Senator Whitehouse. So, to be clear, neither of the
attorneys general present will concede that climate change is a
real problem anywhere in the world.
    Mr. Pruitt. Senator, I think it is immaterial to
discussions about the legal framework of the Clean Air Act.
    Senator Whitehouse. Immaterial or not, I get to ask the
questions, so it is material to my question.
    All right, let's go on to something else.
    We have talked a lot about kilowatt hour cost, and I would
like to make a point, which is that the price of electricity in
Rhode Island, my home State, was 15.2 cents per kilowatt hour.
That compares to 9.67 cents per kilowatt hour in Oklahoma and
it compares to 9.52 cents per kilowatt hour in West Virginia.
However, because of Rhode Island's investment in efficiency and
a whole variety of programs particularly through RGGI, which
has been mentioned earlier, that have been able to bring our
usage down, Rhode Islanders paid only $91.48 per month for
electricity, compared to $110.47 in Oklahoma and $106.44 in
West Virginia.
    Will both of the attorneys general from West Virginia and
Oklahoma concede that the real impact to a consumer is the
dollar amount that they have to write on the check that pays
the bill?
    Mr. Morrisey. Well, Senator, I think where you are going
right now, some of the details in terms of how electricity
prices may vary across the State is a policy question. In West
Virginia we have heard deep concern from power plant operators,
from coal operators about what the impact will be on
electricity prices, so we have seen that in the context of
other proposed regulations that have gone through.
    But I think it is important to reiterate right now to
choose a policy objective and try to advance it through
unlawful means is something that everyone in this body should
reject.
    Senator Whitehouse. Can I go back to the question that I
actually asked? Isn't the economic effect of a policy made real
in a consumer's life by the amount of the check that they
actually write, rather than a per kilowatt hour cost?
    Mr. Morrisey. I think Senator, most people look at the
amount that they are paying when they get in the bill; they
don't analyze the economic effect.
    Senator Whitehouse. That is right.
    Attorney General Pruitt, you agree?
    Mr. Pruitt. I think, Senator, that what is important for
utility companies across the Country is to have choices,
flexibility in the diversity of the portfolio to generate
electricity.
    Senator Whitehouse. I agree with all that, but my question
was quite specific, and that is when you are a utility
consumer, in terms of the economic effect on you, what really
matters is the amount of the check you write, correct?
    Mr. Pruitt. And the long-term economic effect of shuttering
coal generation or fossil fuel generation in this Country,
long-term, will be substantial on consumers.
    Senator Whitehouse. Well, you didn't answer my question;
you segued into your lobbying on behalf of coal. But the answer
to the question is yes or is it no, that the real difference is
made by what the bill is?
    Mr. Pruitt. Senator, I maintain that the State of Oklahoma
is experiencing an increase in cost to consumers because of the
EPA's heavy hand of eliminating fossil fuels from the energy
mix.
    Senator Whitehouse. Well, I would suggest to you that you
try what Rhode Island did, because our costs are higher than
you, but our bills are lower than yours because we actually
took the trouble to invest in a significant way in energy
reduction and efficiency.
    With that, my time has expired.
    Senator Capito. Senator Inhofe.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
    We have been talking about this since 2002, and I can
remember down on the Senate floor they tried to pass a similar
thing that this regulation would do, but pass it by
legislation; and I saw what happened. In fact, that first bill
was the McCain-Lieberman bill; and McCain was a Republican. We
decisively defeated that bill and every bill since that time.
Senator Markey is not here now. He actually had a bill up also.
Now, that has happened.
    This discussion about the science is settled, the science
is settled, the science is settled, every time something comes
up where the science isn't settled, all they talk about is that
science is settled because they don't want to elaborate on
that. I want to make a part of the record an article a couple
weeks ago in The Wall Street Journal called The Myth of Climate
Change 97 Percent.
    This whole thing, they keep saying 97 percent of the
scientists. This totally diffuses that. It would take me too
long to read it, so I will put it into the record without
objection.
    Senator Capito. Without objection.
    [The referenced article follows:]


       [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

    Senator Inhofe. Talk about some of the scientists. I know
Richard Lindzen. I have talked to him. He was quite upset back
when then-Vice President Al Gore was using this politically for
his career. Richard Lindzen is an MIT professor who is
recognized as being one of the top professors around in the
climate and the very thing that we are talking now, and people
ask him the question why is it that people are so concerned
about regulating CO2. He said it is a power grab. He
said, and these are his words, regulation of carbon is a
bureaucrat's dream. If you regulate carbon, you regulate life.
    So this whole idea that the science is settled, the science
is settled is just flat not true.
    Now, I know that people have 12 years of their life wrapped
up in this issue as the only issue of our time; they don't like
to recognize this fact, but, nonetheless, this is a problem. In
fact, I will do this from memory because I have said it so many
times. You go back and you see these cycles that take place in
the world. In 1895 we went into the first cold spell that has
been really talked about, it was about a 30-year cold spell;
and that's when they first said another ice age is coming and
all of that, trying to get people alarmed. Because the world is
always coming to an end when this happens.
    Then in 1918 we went into a warm spell that lasted about 30
years, and that was the first time you heard global warming.
That was 1918. That was a long time ago.
    Then 1945 they changed and it started going into a cold
spell.
    Now, this is the interesting thing about these 30-year
cycles; and it goes right up until today: the year that we had
the greatest surge in emissions of CO2 was right
after the second World War, you guys know this, it was 1945;
and that precipitated not a warming period, but a cooling
period.
    These are realities. I can remember speeches I made on the
floor in response to things that my good friend from Rhode
Island has said when I talk about what is the reality of what
is going on today.
    So we are going to hear more of this and I know that there
is an effort now to have this bureaucratic thing that, in my
opinion, it doesn't have what it is supposed to have. The only
thing I want to get back in and get the response from both
attorneys general is a matter of what we have been talking
about, flexibility. Senator Markey talked about it, Ms.
Heinzerling talked about it. The EPA often talks about the
flexibility and would say that the EPA simply is hiding behind
the flexibility while, in reality, forcing States to figure out
how to make the least economically devastated decisions.
    So I would just ask the two of you does the Clean Power
Plan provide States with any real flexibility? Every witness
has talked about flexibility.
    Mr. Morrisey. I think if you look at this concept of
flexibility, it is a false concept. The reality is that States
are having an enormous amount of pressure applied to them to
develop a State implementation plan within 1 year. Based upon
the declarations that we receive from many of the States,
people really don't think that is possible; that the goals of
this proposal are so severe that States are not going to be
able to come into compliance. So when you look at the proposal
the way it is constituted, I don't think it is fair to say that
it is flexible.
    But our argument has always been regardless of whether
people think that is desirable from a policy perspective, the
law actually doesn't even allow the EPA to go outside the fence
to develop that kind of flexible approach.
    The final point I would also make is that if you look at
the predicate rule that is required before finalizing the
111(d) Rule that is for new source performance standards, that
obviously does not rely on outside-the-fence technology. When
they develop their best system of emission reductions, it is
much more narrow.
    Senator Inhofe. General Pruitt.
    Mr. Pruitt. I think that my colleague, my fellow panelist
here, Roger, addressed it well earlier. Flexibility with
respect to how plans are adopted is something the States
endeavor to possess and have, but flexibility with respect to
performance standards, inside-the-fence versus outside-the-
fence, that is what we are really facing here. The EPA has
taken an approach of forcing performance standards upon the
State of Oklahoma that outside-the-fence, they are providing
less options in the future as far as how to comply.
    Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
    Senator Capito. Thank you.
    Senator Carper.
    Senator Carper. Thanks much.
    If I could, I am not a lawyer either. I studied economics,
got an MBA, but I am not a lawyer, and I don't understand some
of this discussion when we get into these technicalities. But I
do know this: I have seen us pass legislation when I was in the
House with Senator Inhofe and in the Senate where we were
putting the same bill, conflicting approaches to the same
issue. In some cases we were just unable to resolve our
differences, so we put both in and say somebody else will
figure this out. I think, in a way, when I saw this discussion
around Section 111(d) of the Clean Air Act, it reminded me of
that kind of behavior.
    I am looking at your testimony, Lisa, where you say based
on the text of Section 111(d) alone, EPA has persuasively
defended its proposed view that the statute is ambiguous and
that its interpretation is reasonable. These are the criterion
for the Chevron deference and EPA has met them.
    Explain this so I can understand. I think I do, but we have
these two amendments, one dropped out of the Code, but now I am
told it still is in another life. Explain this to us, please.
    Ms. Heinzerling. So, Congress, in 1990, passed two
different amendments to Section 111(d). One seemed to look to
pollutants; one seemed to look to sources. But as EPA has
explained, as I note there, they are not entirely clear, either
one of them standing alone, and the combination is not entirely
clear coming together. So what EPA has tried to do is try to
take from each amendment something, and what it said is you
cannot regulate the same pollutants from the same sources under
both programs, Section 111 and 112.
    That is the kind of judgment, as you are suggesting, that
agencies make all the time. There are many times when statutes
aren't entirely clear. They may contain provisions that are in
contention with each other, and agencies resolve them. And this
usually is a straightforward application of what I call there
as Chevron deference, which is a case in which the Supreme
Court said that if a statute is not clear, if policy judgments
are left to the agency to make, then the agency gets deference
to a reasonable interpretation of the statute.
    And here I think the text allows EPA's interpretation. I
would also say, in light of the comments earlier about the
problem of global warming, just imagine if the EPA said, no, we
will take the interpretation that does not allow us to regulate
the sources of greenhouse gases that emit the most greenhouse
gases in this Country, and to attack the problem of climate
change by doing that; we are going to pick the interpretation
that does not permit us to do that. That would be quite
strange.
    Senator Carper. Yes, it would.
    Question if I could, Ms. Backman, please. I want to go back
to the issue of whether the science of climate change is
settled law. Just very briefly, do you think it is or do you
think it is not?
    Ms. Speakes-Backman. I am sorry, could you repeat that?
    Senator Carper. The question on whether the science of
climate change is indeed settled law. Do you believe it is? Do
you believe it is not?
    Ms. Speakes-Backman. Well, Senator, I am also not a lawyer,
and I am not a climate scientist, but I do choose to believe
the overwhelming majority of climate scientists who say it is
real and say it is caused by humans. So now we need to act. And
I can tell you also that there is a cost to action, but there
is also a cost to inaction. And I can tell you, as one who is
responsible for consumers, electricity consumers who depend on
reliable, affordable energy, that certain ways to help the
system include renewable energy, include energy efficiency,
include demand reduction to help with those reliability issues
and to help with the resiliency of our system.
    Senator Carper. OK, that is fine. Just hold it right there.
    One last question, if I could, for Lisa. Are EPA's proposed
carbon standards supported by the three Supreme Court decisions
in Massachusetts v. EPA and American Electric Power v.
Connecticut and Utility Air Regulatory Group v. EPA? Thanks
very much.
    Ms. Heinzerling. Yes.
    Senator Carper. Tell us more.
    Ms. Heinzerling. Yes. Massachusetts v. EPA, of course, held
that greenhouse gases are air pollutants within the meaning of
the Clean Air Act. I think much of what we hear against EPA's
Clean Power Plan is an attempt to re-litigate that case, to
tell us that carbon dioxide is not really an air pollutant, it
is not dirty somehow, so, therefore, it is not regulable under
the Clean Air Act. That case clearly holds that these
pollutants are regulable under the Clean Air Act.
    American Electric Power is interesting because it relied on
regulation under Section 111(d) in holding that there was no
so-called Federal common law, court made law of global warming
pollution. That is significant because if this regulation goes
by the boards, then all the reasons for that common law come
back to force.
    And the last, the Utility Air Regulatory Group, it seems to
me that case can be understood most generally first as a
victory for most of EPA's greenhouse gas program that was at
issue there and, second, it asked EPA to look section-by-
section and make sure that regulation under a particular
provision of the Clean Air Act made sense for particular
pollutants. That is exactly what EPA has done here.
    Senator Carper. Madam Chair, I would just say this is a
good panel, and I commend you and our staffs for pulling them
together.
    Thank you all for coming. If I ever go to law school, I
would like you to be my professor.
    Senator Capito. Thank you very much. I would like to thank
the panel and thank the Senators.
    Senator Whitehouse. Will there be questions for the record
allowed?
    Senator Capito. Yes. We will leave the record open for 2
weeks and you can submit questions for the record.
    Senator Whitehouse. Very well. We will do that.
    Senator Capito. Thank you all very much. Appreciate it.
Appreciate your patience when we had to leave.
    This hearing is adjourned.
    [Whereupon, at 11:52 a.m. the committee was adjourned.]
    [An additional statement submitted for the record follows:]

                 Statement of Hon. Benjamin L. Cardin,
                U.S. Senator from the State of Maryland

    I want to welcome Maryland Public Service Commissioner, and
Chair of the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative, Kelly Speakes-
Backman to the Committee and thank her for her service and
willingness to testify before the Committee. Commissioner
Speakes-Backman has served on the Maryland PSC for 4 years and
has spent more than 20 years working on energy, sustainability,
and environmental business strategies.
    She is a tremendous asset to RGGI for which I am proud
Maryland is an active participant. Through her work on the PSC,
the Maryland Energy Administration and RGGI, she has helped
Maryland take steps to reduce its carbon footprint while
maintaining affordable and reliable energy and helped grow new
and exciting business opportunities in the State.
    Thank you for being here.
    With bi-partisan support, Congress passed the Clean Air Act
that President Richard Nixon signed into law on the last day of
the year in 1970. The Clean Air Act came about in response to
devastating air pollution that made it nearly impossible to see
the sky during certain times of the year in cities like Los
Angeles, New York and my home town of Baltimore.
    After almost 45 years, the Clean Air Act has effectively
helped clean up the air in most major cities. The proof is in
the decline of bad-air days we experience in the Mid-Atlantic
and Northeast during the hot summer months. It used to be that
in the DC-Baltimore metropolitan areas during the 1970s, 1980s
and 1990s, anytime the temperature reached into the 90s we'd
inevitable have ground level ozone levels so high that the
National Weather Service would issue ``red alerts'' for air
quality.
    The Clean Air Act is working. The number of ``red alert''
and ``orange alert'' days have been in decline, despite our
region experiencing some of the hottest summers on record since
the start of this century. Not to mention that our nation's
economy has expanded exponentially under the Clean Air Act.
    I'd like to address a legislative proposal that recently
passed the House allowing States to opt out of the Clean Air
Act. When EPA promulgates rules to reduce smog causing
pollutants like NOx and SOx, Members of
Congress may complain about the stringency of the requirements,
but Congress has never entertained legislation allowing upwind
polluters to opt out of the regulations designed to protect
their neighbors' air quality and public health. Yet the
approach of excusing responsibility of States from contributing
to addressing a national problem is precisely what is moving
through Congress and that the majority leader is writing
letters to Governors urging them to do.
    EPA's authority to regulate CO2 under the Clean
Air Act has been affirmed by the Supreme Court in two landmark
Clean Air Act cases. When the commonwealth of Massachusetts,
among other States, took EPA to court over a petition of
certiorari for abdicating its responsibility to regulate
greenhouse gases under the Clean Air Act, the court, in
Massachusetts v. EPA (2007), found in favor of Massachusetts.
    The Clean Air Act defines ``air pollutant'' as ``any air
pollution agent or combination of such agents, including any
physical, chemical, biological, radioactive . . . substance or
matter which is emitted into or otherwise enters the ambient
air.'' On remand from Massachusetts v. EPA, EPA found that six
greenhouse gases, emitted from the combustion of carbon based
fuels, ``in the atmosphere may reasonably be anticipated both
to endanger public health and to endanger public welfare.''
    The Court prescribed EPA conduct an endangerment finding
process to determine how greenhouse gases ``cause, or
contribute to, air pollution which may reasonably be
anticipated to endanger public health or welfare.''
    In 2009, EPA conducted its endangerment finding, it was
subject to public comment, there were several public hearings,
thousands of public comments were received and eventually the
Endangerment Finding was finalized. Without surprise the
Endangerment Finding was challenged.
    The U.S. Chamber of Commerce and The National Manufacturing
Association, under a coalition named ``The Coalition for
Responsible Regulation,'' brought the challenge in a
consolidated court case. This group also challenged the Light
Duty Truck Rule: a rule developed to harmonize regulations to
reduce GHGs and improve fuel economy in small trucks; and the
Tailoring Rule: which set GHG thresholds for regulating GHGs
under New Source Review Prevention of Significant
Deterioration.
    In Coalition for Responsible Regulation v. EPA, the
petitioners sought judicial review of EPA's determination in
the U.S. Court of Appeals, D.C. Circuit. On June 26, 2012, the
court issued an opinion which dismissed the challenges to the
EPA's endangerment finding and the related GHG regulations.
    The three-judge panel unanimously upheld the EPA's central
finding that GHGs such as CO2 endanger public health
and are likely responsible for the global warming experienced
over the past half-century.
    Prior to the D.C. Circuit's ruling in CRR v. EPA, the
Supreme Court heard another case of importance and influence
regarding carbon pollution. In American Electric Power Company
v. Connecticut (2011) was a unanimous SCOTUS decision which
held that corporations cannot be sued individually for GHGs
emissions under Federal common law, because the Clean Air Act
delegates the management of GHGs emissions to the EPA. This is
important because it further lays the groundwork for nationwide
regulation of carbon pollution.
    Most recently, on June 23, 2014, the Supreme Court once
again upheld and affirmed EPA's responsibility to regulate
carbon pollution under the Clean Air Act.
    This specific challenge was to EPA's authority to regulate
stationary sources, precisely what the Clean Power Plan does.
The Supreme Court, in a decision where Justice Scalia wrote the
majority opinion and all justices concurring with at least some
portions of decision, affirmed EPA's legal authority to
regulate GHGs under its existing Clean Air Act authorities.
    The bottom line is that this Committee is not the Supreme
Court. The final arbiter on the legality of the Clean Power
Plan is the Supreme Court, and based on the rulings in the case
law that preceded, instructed and informed EPA's proposed Clean
Power Plan it would seem very likely that the Supreme Court
will uphold this rule.
    The statutory authority granted under the 1970 Clean Air
Act, and three Federal court decisions including two Supreme
Court decisions, laid the legal groundwork for a commonsense
approach to regulating carbon pollution under Section 111(d) of
the Clean Air Act.
    Sec. 111 authorizes EPA to establish baseline performance
standards for power plants, which in the case of this rule we
are talking about achieving a 30 percent net reduction in
carbon pollution from power plants, using 2005 as the baseline,
by 2030.
    Moreover, the rule is flexible in how these ``performance
standards'' are met by applying these standards broadly across
each State's fleet of power plants, rather than demanding these
reductions from each individual power plant.
    This approach to regulation puts States in control of how
their fleet of power generation facilities will meet these
reduction targets. The performance standard is applied across
all power generation facilities, including carbon intensive
facilities like coal power plants, and zero emission power like
nuclear, hydro and wind.
    Through this rule, solutions can be sought outside the
fence, it may be possible for States to meet these standards
through increased in-state development of renewable energy and
improved energy efficiency standard, without having to shut
down or drastically change the operations of its coal power
plants.
    States will be in control of how they will meet these
standards and there are a wide variety of tools in the toolbox
for States to use to meet these standards.
    Using RGGI as its model and approach for compliance with
the rule, RGGI generates more than $200 million annually in
revenues for Maryland, meaning compliance with this rule will
continue to bring needed revenues into the State. Moreover,
electricity rates have stabilized in Maryland providing price
certainty for ratepayers which would be unchanged so long as
Maryland remains a RGGI State. Last, MD's regulated community
understands and appreciates the regulatory certainty the RGGI
has provided.
    That's why our State's largest electricity generator has
submitted comments that support the goals of the proposed
rules, while at the same time suggest how the rule may be
improved to better accommodate nuclear power generation.
    I applaud Exelon's constructive participation and approach
to the rulemaking process. I'm proud that Maryland's energy
companies, like Constellation/Exelon are making investments to
reduce the carbon output of its power generation fleet in
Maryland and in the other States they are operating in.
    These early adopters made the correct investments and
assumptions about where regulation was headed all based on
information that everyone in the power generation sector had
available.
    The actions taken by Maryland's power sector and State
regulators show an understanding of how important addressing
climate change is to Maryland. After all, it makes good
business sense in Maryland for power providers to do their part
to reduce the causes of climate change, because 70 percent of
the State's population live in the coastal regions of the
State.

                                 [all]
